
asparagus timbale 


SERVES 6 TO 8 

1 teaspoon coarse salt, plus more 
for cooking water 


10 ounces medium asparagus, 
tough ends trimmed 

1/2 cup defrosted frozen spinach 
(about 4 ounces) 


1 tablespoon unsalted butter 
1/2 cup chopped onion 


1 small garlic clove, chopped 
5 large eggs 


1/8 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 
1/4 teaspoon freshly ground nutmeg 


1 cup heavy cream 
1/2 cup mache or field greens (optional) 


1. Preheat the oven to 325 degrees F. Line a 9 x 1  baking 
pan with a kitchen towel. Line the brioche pan 
with plastic wrap. 
2. Prepare an ice bath; set aside. Bring a medium 
pot of water to boil, and add salt. Add the asparagus, 
and cook just until tender and bright green, 1 
to 2 minutes. Using a slotted spoon, transfer the asparagus 
to the ice bath. Drain, and set aside. Add 
the spinach to the boiling water, and cook 4 minutes. 
Transfer to a colander to drain; set aside. 
3. In a small skillet, melt the butter over medium-
low heat. Add the chopped onion and garlic; saute, 
stirring frequently, until the onion is softened and just 
starting to color, 6 to 8 minutes. Remove from heat. 
4. Bring a large pot of water to a boil. Cut the asparagus 
spears in half crosswise. Slice the bottom 
ends in half lengthwise, and then cut them crosswise 
into thin half-moons; set aside. In the bowl of 
a food processor fitted with the metal blade, combine 
the asparagus tops, reserved spinach, and 
onion mixture. Process until very smooth, about 5 
minutes, stopping to scrape down the sides as necessary. 
Transfer to a large bowl. Add the eggs, salt, 
pepper, and nutmeg; whisk to combine. Set aside. 
5. In a small saucepan over medium heat, heat the 
cream until bubbles form around the edges and it 
starts to steam, about 2 minutes. Remove from heat. 
Whisking constantly, slowly add the cream to the 
egg mixture. Stir in the reserved sliced asparagus. 
Pour the custard into the lined brioche pan, and 
place it in the lined baking pan. Carefully pour the 
hot water into the baking pan until it reaches 
halfway up the sides of the brioche pan. 
6. Bake until the center is firm when gently touched 
with your finger, about 65 minutes. Transfer the 
brioche pan to a wire rack; let cool 5 minutes. Carefully 
invert the pan onto a serving platter, and gently 
lift the pan to remove. Slice into wedges; serve 
garnished with greens, if desired. 







spicy seared scallop canapes 

MAKES 48 

6 tablespoons all-purpose flour 

11/2 teaspoons cayenne pepper, or more 
to taste 

1 tablespoon ground cumin 
1 tablespoon ground coriander 


11/2 teaspoons coarse salt 

3/4 teaspoon ground cardamom 
24 sea scallops (about 11/2 pounds), halved 

1 1 -long daikon radish, peeled 
and cut into 48  -thick rounds 


5 romaine lettuce leaves, very thinly sliced 
Olive oil cooking spray 


1. Combine the flour, cayenne pepper, cumin, coriander, 
salt, and cardamom in a small bowl. Dip 
each halved scallop into the flour mixture to coat. 
2. Place the daikon rounds on a serving platter. Top 
each with shredded lettuce; set aside. 
3. Heat a medium nonstick skillet over medium 
heat. Coat with olive oil spray, add the coated scallops, 
and sear until light golden brown and cooked 
through, about 1 minute per side. Transfer each 
seared scallop half to a daikon round. Serve warm 
or at room temperature. 

FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER HALF-SCALLOP: 20 CALORIES, 0 G 

FAT, 5 MG CHOLESTEROL, 2 G CARBOHYDRATE, 59 MG 

SODIUM, 3 G PROTEIN, 0 G FIBER 

66 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 





grilled quesadillas 

SERVES 12 

3/4 cup Major Grey's chutney 
12 6-inch flour tortillas 

11/2 cups sharp Cheddar cheese, grated 
on the large holes of a box grater 

3/4 cup sour cream, for garnish 
Tomatillo Salsa (recipe follows) 

Preheat the grill. Using a spatula, spread 2 tablespoons 
of the chutney evenly over 6 tortillas. On 
each, sprinkle 1/4 cup cheese over the chutney; top 
with the remaining tortillas. Grill until the cheese 
is melted and the tortillas are slightly golden, about 
2 minutes on each side. Using a sharp knife or scissors, 
cut each tortilla into 6 wedges. Serve with sour 
cream and salsa. 






tomatillo salsa 

MAKES 3 CUPS 

11/2 pounds tomatillos, husks removed 

1 jalapeno pepper 

1 small yellow onion, finely chopped 

2 tablespoons red-wine vinegar 

1/4 cup chopped fresh cilantro 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

Preheat the grill. Roast the tomatillos and jalapeno 
until soft and slightly charred, about 10 minutes. 
Set aside to cool. Remove the charred skin from the 
jalapeno. Halve the jalapeno lengthwise; remove 
the seeds. Chop finely, and set aside. Chop the 
tomatillos. Place them in a bowl, and add the 
jalapeno, onion, vinegar, and cilantro. Season with 
salt and pepper. 






lamb kofta 

SERVES 6 TO 8 

1 pound ground lamb 

4 teaspoons Spice Mixture (recipe follows) 
1 teaspoon paprika 


1/4 teaspoon ground cinnamon 
1 large egg 


1/2 onion, grated on the large holes of 
a box grater (1/2 cup) 


1 garlic clove, minced 
1/3 cup pine nuts, toasted and chopped 


1/3 cup finely chopped fresh flat-leaf parsley 
1 teaspoon coarse salt 


1 tablespoon olive oil 

Yogurt Mint Sauce, for serving 
(recipe follows) 


1. In a large bowl, combine all the ingredients except 
the oil and yogurt sauce. Mix thoroughly with 
your hands or a wooden spoon. Form the mixture 
into 1  balls, and flatten the balls into ovals 
or football shapes, about 1/4 inch thick. 
2. In a large nonstick skillet, heat 1/2 tablespoon of 
the oil over medium-high heat. Add half the lamb 
patties. Cook until the first side is golden brown, 
about 3 minutes; flip the patties, and cook 2 minutes 
more. Transfer to a paper-towel-lined plate. 
3. Wipe the skillet with a paper towel; heat the remaining 
1/2 tablespoon oil. Repeat the process with 
the remaining lamb patties. Serve warm or at room 
temperature with yogurt sauce on the side. 






spice mixture 

MAKES 1/4 CUP 

41/2 teaspoons ground coriander 

4 teaspoons ground cumin 
11/2 teaspoons ground nutmeg 

1 teaspoon ground cinnamon 
1/2 teaspoon ground cloves 


1/2 teaspoon cayenne pepper 

STARTERS 67 
Mix the spices together in a small bowl or container. 
Store, tightly sealed, at room temperature up to 
3 months. 








yogurt mint sauce 

MAKES 1 CUP 

8 ounces plain whole-milk yogurt, 
preferably Greek-style 


3 tablespoons finely chopped fresh mint 
11/2 teaspoons fresh lemon juice 

1 small garlic clove, minced 

Combine all ingredients in a small bowl, and stir 
well to combine. Sauce can be made up to 1 day 
ahead; store in an airtight container in the refrigerator. 
Serve chilled or at room temperature. 










avocado with grapefruit 
and sweet-onion salsa 

SERVES 4 

2 pink grapefruits 
1/4 cup finely chopped sweet onion 


2 tablespoons chopped fresh cilantro 
Coarse salt 


2 avocados, cut in half, pitted and peeled 

1. Cut off both ends of the grapefruits, and remove 
the peel, pith, and outer membranes, following the 
curve of the fruit with a paring knife. Working over 
a bowl to catch the juices, use the knife to carefully 
slice between the sections and membranes of each 
grapefruit to remove the segments. Slice each 
grapefruit segment into small pieces, and set aside. 
2. Place the onion in a small bowl. Squeeze the remaining 
juice from the grapefruit membranes over 
the onions, and let stand 20 minutes to soften. Pour 
off and discard the juice. Add the grapefruit segments 
and cilantro. Add enough reserved grapefruit 
juice to moisten. Season with salt. To serve, 
place 3 to 4 tablespoons salsa on each of the avocado 
halves. 



bagna cauda 

MAKES ABOUT 11/4 CUPS 

2 tablespoons unsalted butter 
3 large garlic cloves, roughly chopped 


1/2 3-ounce tin anchovy fillets, drained 
and roughly chopped 


1/3 cup olive oil 
1 tablespoon milk 


1. Melt the butter in a small saute pan over medium-
low heat. Add the garlic, and cook until softened 
but not browned, 1 to 2 minutes. Add the anchovies 
and oil, and reduce heat to low. Cook, stirring occasionally, 
until the mixture is softened and lightly 
browned, about 20 minutes. Remove from heat; let 
cool slightly. 
2. Transfer the mixture to the jar of a blender, and 
add the milk; puree until thick and smooth, about 
2 minutes. Transfer to an airtight container, and 
store in the refrigerator until ready to serve, preferably 
overnight and up to 4 days. 


68 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 







mini corn cakes with 
goat cheese and pepper jelly 


MAKES 42 

An old-fashioned cast-iron skillet with shallow 
round indentations is ideal for making uniform 
corn cakes. Since these pans can be rather hard 
to find, you can use a regular cast-iron skillet and 
achieve equally lovely results. Pepper jelly adds a 
bit of sweetness and subtle heat. Look for it at 
farmer's markets and in gourmet shops. 

11/2 cups all-purpose flour 

1/4 cup sugar 
1/2 cup yellow cornmeal 


1 tablespoon baking powder 
1/2 teaspoon salt 


11/4 cups milk 
2 large eggs, room temperature 

1/3 cup vegetable oil, plus more for the pan 
3 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted 


1 151/4-ounce can corn kernels, drained 
8 ounces fresh goat cheese, thinly sliced 


1 cup pepper jelly 

1. Whisk together the flour, sugar, cornmeal, baking 
powder, and salt in a medium bowl. In a small 
bowl, whisk together the milk, eggs, oil, and butter 
until smooth and combined. Add the milk mixture 
to the flour mixture, and stir just until the batter is 
combined; fold in corn kernels. 
2. Heat a cast-iron skillet over medium heat, and 
rub it with enough oil to coat the surface. Drop batter 
by the tablespoon to make   cakes. Cook 
until undersides are golden brown, 45 to 60 seconds; 
turn over, and continue cooking until other 
sides are browned and cakes are heated through, 
about 1 minute. To serve, top each cake with a slice 
of goat cheese and a dollop of pepper jelly. 



marinated goat cheese 
with oregano 

SERVES 4 TO 6 

5 goat cheese buttons 

1/4 cup oregano flowers and leaves 
1 garlic clove, peeled 


1 teaspoon whole black peppercorns 
1 cup extra-virgin olive oil 


Combine the goat cheese, oregano, garlic, and peppercorns 
in a jar. Add the olive oil. Store, refrigerated, 
up to 5 days. 






tropical fruit and crab salsa 

MAKES 41/2 CUPS 


1 small onion, cut into   dice 

1 ripe mango, peeled, pitted, and sliced 
into   dice 


1 ripe papaya, peeled, seeded, and 
cut into   dice 


1/4 pineapple, peeled, cored, and cut 
into   dice 


1 jalapeno pepper, seeds and ribs 
removed, cut into   dice 


1/4 cup fresh lime juice 

1/4 cup fresh cilantro leaves, chopped 

1/2 pound jumbo lump crabmeat, picked 
over and rinsed 


Coarse salt 
Freshly ground black pepper 


Combine the onion, mango, papaya, pineapple, 
jalapeno, lime juice, and cilantro in a large bowl. Toss 
well to combine. Add the crabmeat, and toss gently. 
Season with salt and pepper. Serve immediately. 

STARTERS 69 






fried plantain chips 

SERVES 4 TO 6 

8 cups vegetable oil 

4 ripe plantains, peeled and sliced 
lengthwise 


Coarse salt 

In a large, heavy-bottomed saucepan, heat the oil 
over medium-high heat until it is hot but not smoking, 
about 350 degrees F on a deep-fry thermometer. Working 
in batches, fry the plantain slices until they are 
golden and crisp, 4 to 5 minutes. Transfer to a 
paper-towel-lined baking sheet; sprinkle with salt 
while still hot. Serve immediately. 








warm red lentil dal 
with pita chips 

SERVES 6 

1/2 pound red lentils (about 11/4 cups), picked 
over and rinsed 


1 141/2-ounce can low-sodium chicken broth, 
or homemade, skimmed of fat 

1 cup water 
1/2 teaspoon turmeric 


2 tablespoons unsalted butter 
4 garlic cloves, minced 


11/4 teaspoons cumin seeds 
1/2 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes 

1 large tomato, seeded and finely diced 
1/4 cup fresh mint, finely chopped 


1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 

1. In a medium saucepan, combine the lentils, broth, 
water, and turmeric. Bring to a boil, reduce heat, and 
simmer, stirring occasionally, until the lentils are 
tender, about 20 minutes. 
2. Meanwhile, melt the butter in a small saucepan; 
add the garlic, cumin seeds, and crushed red pepper. 
Cook, stirring, until fragrant, about 3 minutes. 
3. Remove the lentils from heat, and stir in the garlic 
mixture, diced tomato, mint, and salt. Serve warm. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 189 CALORIES, 5 G FAT, 

11 MG CHOLESTEROL, 25 G CARBOHYDRATE, 291 MG 

SODIUM, 12 G PROTEIN, 3 G FIBER 







baked oysters with spinach 
and champagne beurre blanc 

MAKES 24 

2 to 3 cups rock or coarse salt 

2 dozen oysters, shucked, liquor 
and bottom shells reserved separately 


1 cup heavy cream 
1 cup dry champagne or sparkling wine 


3 large shallots, minced (about 1/2 cup) 
1/4 cup white-wine vinegar 


21/2 sticks (11/4 cups) cold unsalted butter, 
cut into pieces 

Coarse salt and freshly ground 
white pepper 


1 pound fresh


Snipped fresh chives, for garnish 

1. Pour the salt into a rimmed baking sheet. Nestle 
the oyster shells in the salt; set aside. 
2. Bring the cream to a boil. Reduce to a simmer; 
cook until reduced by half. Remove from heat. 
3. Meanwhile, place the champagne, shallots, and 
vinegar in another small saucepan. Bring to a simmer, 
and cook until the liquid is almost evaporated. 
Add the reduced cream, and cook for 1 minute. 
4. Remove pan from heat, and whisk in butter, 
1 piece at a time, adding each piece before the previous 
one melts completely. (The sauce should not 
get hot enough to liquefy.) Add 1/2 cup oyster liquor; 
season with salt and pepper. Keep warm. 
5. If using fresh spinach, rinse it thoroughly several 
times, and place in a saucepan with just the water 
that clings to the leaves. Cover the pan, and cook 
the spinach until bright green and just tender, about 
2 minutes. Drain well, and roughly chop. (Squeeze 
excess moisture from thawed frozen spinach.) 


70 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


6. Preheat the broiler with the rack set 5 inches from 
the heat source. Divide the spinach equally among 
the shells. Top with the shucked oysters. Spoon on 
enough sauce to cover the oysters, about 1 tablespoon 
per shell. Place under the broiler until the 
sauce bubbles and the edges of the oysters start to 
curl, about 1 minute. Garnish with chives, and serve. 
moules poulette (broiled 
mussels with mushrooms, 
lemon, and cream) 

MAKES ABOUT 36 

2 cups dry white wine 

2 pounds large mussels, scrubbed and 
debearded 


2 tablespoons unsalted butter 

1 tablespoon all-purpose flour 
1 cup thinly sliced mushrooms, such as 
shiitake or oyster (3 ounces) 
1/2 cup heavy cream 


Juice of 1 lemon (about 2 tablespoons) 
1 teaspoon coarse salt 


1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 
1/2 cup grated Gruyere cheese (1 ounce) 


1. Bring the wine to a simmer in a large skillet over 
high heat. Add the mussels, and cook, stirring frequently, 
until they have opened, up to about 5 minutes. 
Transfer the mussels as they open to a bowl 
to cool. Strain the cooking liquid through a fine-
mesh strainer into a measuring cup, reserving 1 cup 
liquid and discarding any grit. 
2. Discard any mussels that did not open or that 
have broken shells. Open each mussel, discarding 
the empty half-shell. Loosen each mussel from its 
shell, and arrange the mussels on an ovenproof platter 
or rimmed baking sheet. Cover with plastic wrap; 
refrigerate while making the sauce. 
3. Mash 1 tablespoon butter with the flour until 
smooth; set aside. Melt the remaining tablespoon 
butter in a small saucepan over medium heat. Add 
the mushrooms, and cook until tender, about 4 minutes. 
Add the reserved mussel liquid, and bring to 
a boil. Whisk in the butter-and-flour mixture. Whisk 
in the cream, lemon juice, salt, and pepper. Simmer 
until reduced by two-thirds and thickened. Remove 
the pan from the heat, and keep warm. 

4. Heat the broiler. Position the rack 3 to 4 inches 
from the heat. Remove the mussels from the refrigerator, 
and spoon sauce over each one until well 
coated. Sprinkle with grated cheese, and place 
under the broiler until golden brown, 3 to 4 minutes. 
Serve immediately. 








shrimp summer rolls 

MAKES 8 

1 pound (about 30) small shrimp, 
peeled and deveined 


8 9-inch-round rice papers 

8 large red-leaf lettuce leaves, 
cut in half lengthwise 


1 medium carrot, peeled, cut in matchsticks 

1 small daikon radish, peeled, cut 
into matchsticks 


1 red bell pepper, seeds and membranes 
removed, cut in matchsticks 


1 bunch fresh chives, ends trimmed 

1/4 cup packed mint leaves 
Soy Dipping Sauce (recipe follows) 


1. Bring a large pot of water to a boil. Reduce to a 
simmer. Add the cleaned shrimp; poach until pink 
and cooked through, about 2 minutes. Slice the 
cooked shrimp in half lengthwise. Set aside. 
2. Fill a pan (large enough to hold the rice paper) 
with hot water. Dampen a clean kitchen towel with 
water; spread it out on a clean surface. Dip 1 sheet 
rice paper in the hot water for 5 seconds; transfer 
to the dampened towel, and smooth out (the wrapper 
will still feel hard, but it will soften as it sits). 
3. Place 4 shrimp halves in a row, cut side up, 2 inches 
from the bottom edge. Place 2 pieces of lettuce over 
the shrimp. Top with more shrimp halves, some carrots, 
daikon, pepper, chives, and mint. 
4. Fold the bottom edge of the rice paper over the 
filling. Continue to roll tightly so the shrimp halves 
are enclosed but still showing through the rice paper. 
STARTERS 71 


5. Place the finished roll on a plate; cover with a 
damp paper towel. Continue until all the ingredients 
are used. Serve with dipping sauce. 







soy dipping sauce 

MAKES ABOUT 1 CUP 

1/2 cup soy sauce 

1/2 cup rice-wine vinegar 
2 tablespoons thinly sliced scallions 


Combine all ingredients, and serve. 







chicken and corn empanadas 

MAKES 24 

1/4 cup olive oil 

11/2 cups finely chopped white onion 
1 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes 

1 teaspoon dried oregano, preferably


Coarse salt 
1/2 cup finely chopped red bell peppers 


1/2 cup finely chopped green bell peppers 

5 small ears corn, kernels removed 
(about 11/2 cups) 


1 pound boneless, skinless chicken thigh 
meat, cut into   pieces 


2 tablespoons dry white wine 
6 ounces Monterey Jack cheese, shredded 


Empanada Dough (recipe follows), chilled 

1 large egg, lightly beaten with 
1 tablespoon water 


1. Heat the olive oil in a large skillet over medium 
heat. Add the onion, red pepper flakes, and oregano. 
Saute, stirring occasionally, until lightly browned, 
about 4 minutes. Season with the salt. Cook for 1 
minute. Add the red and green peppers and corn. 
Cook until the peppers soften and any liquid has 
evaporated, about 3 minutes. 
2. To the same pan, add the chicken and wine, and 
season with salt. Cook until the chicken is just 
cooked through and almost all of the liquid has 
evaporated, about 3 minutes. Refrigerate the filling 
until chilled; stir in the cheese. The filling may be 
prepared and refrigerated, covered, for up to 2 days. 

3. Fill a small bowl with cold water. Roll out the 
dough to a thickness of 1/8 inch. Using a  diameter 
plate as a template, cut out 24 circles. 
Spoon about 1/4 cup chilled filling into the center of 
a circle, leaving a   border. Brush the border 
with cold water. Fold the dough over, stretching it 
slightly, to form a half-moon shape. Beginning at 
one end, press the edges together to seal, while trying 
to remove any air pockets. Press again to ensure 
the empanadas are well sealed. Using a fork or 
your fingers, crimp the edges to form a decorative 
edge. Repeat with the remaining circles and filling. 
4. Brush the empanadas with egg wash, and refrigerate 
at least 30 minutes (but no longer than 1 
day). Once filled, the empanadas may be frozen and 
baked later, without defrosting, in a preheated 
350 degrees F oven for 30 to 40 minutes. 
5. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees  F. Line two baking 
sheets with parchment paper. Arrange the empanadas 
on the baking sheets. Bake until puffed 
and browned and the filling is bubbling inside, 15 
to 20 minutes. Serve immediately. 









empanada dough 

MAKES ENOUGH DOUGH FOR 

24 EMPANADAS 

4 cups all-purpose flour, plus more for 
kneading 


2 teaspoons baking powder 

1 teaspoon coarse salt 

3/4 cup lard 
3/4 cup (11/2 sticks) cold unsalted butter, 
cut into pieces 
Cold water (about 3/4 cup) 

Combine the flour, baking powder, and salt in a food 
processor fitted with the steel blade. Add the lard 
and butter, and pulse until the mixture is the texture 
of coarse meal. With the processor running, 
slowly add enough water to form a firm dough. 
Transfer to a lightly floured work surface, and knead 
until the dough comes together and becomes 
smooth. Wrap in plastic wrap, and chill for 1 hour. 

72 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 









chile-cheese tamales 

MAKES 16 

The tamales can be made through step 4 up to a 
month in advance and frozen; steam directly 
from the freezer (cooking time will be longer- 
follow recipe directions to check for doneness). 

4 ounces dried corn husks 

3 cups corn kernels, drained well 

1/2 cup (4 ounces) fresh pork lard or solid 
vegetable shortening 


2 cups masa harina mixed with 11/2 cups hot 
water, cooled to room temperature 

2 tablespoons sugar 
11/2 teaspoons coarse salt 

11/2 teaspoons baking powder 

2 poblano chiles, roasted, seeds and ribs 
removed, and cut into   strips 


2 cups (8 ounces) grated Monterey 
Jack cheese 


1. Place the husks in a deep saucepan; cover with 
water. Bring to a boil over high heat. Remove from 
heat; set a plate over the husks to keep them submerged. 
Soak 1 hour. 
2. Prepare the filling: Place 2 cups corn in the bowl 
of a food processor; pulse to a medium-coarse 
puree. Add the lard; pulse five or six times. Add the 
masa harina, sugar, salt, and baking powder; pulse 
until combined. Process until the mixture is light, 
fluffy, and evenly combined, about 1 minute; scrape 
down the sides of the bowl once or twice. 
3. Transfer the mixture to a bowl; stir in the remaining 
1 cup corn until combined. Chill the filling 
until ready to assemble. 
4. Remove a large husk from the water; pat dry. Unroll, 
and tear along the grain to make  -wide 
strips (you need two per tamale). Remove another 
large piece; pat dry. Place on a work surface, pointed 
end facing away from you; scoop 1/4 cup batter into 
the middle; spread into a 4-inch square, leaving a 
1  border. Place some chile strips down the 
center; sprinkle with 2 tablespoons cheese. Pick up 
the long sides of the husk so the batter encases the 
filling. Bring the sides together to form a cylinder. 
Fold the wide end under; tie with a husk strip. Tie 
the pointed end near batter; fray the exposed husk. 
Repeat with the remaining husks, batter, poblanos, 
and cheese. 

5. Fill a wok or large skillet with 2 inches water. Line 
the bottom of a bamboo steamer basket with husks; 
set the basket in place. Lay the tamales in the 
steamer over high heat. When steam puffs out, reduce 
heat to medium. Steam 1 hour 15 minutes; add 
water to the pan as necessary. Check for doneness 
by unwrapping a tamale; the mixture should release 
easily and feel soft. If it sticks, rewrap; steam 15 to 
20 minutes more. Remove from heat; let stand 15 
minutes; tamales will stay warm about 1 hour. 






chicken liver pate 
with toast points 


MAKES 2 CUPS 

1/2 ounce mixed dried wild mushrooms, such 
as porcini, shiitake, or wood ear 


2/3 cup boiling water 

4 tablespoons unsalted butter 

1 pound fresh chicken livers, tough membranes 
removed, rinsed and patted dry 


4 sprigs thyme, leaves roughly chopped 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


1/2 garlic clove, minced 
1 tablespoon brandy 


1 slice white bread, crusts removed, 
cut into cubes 


1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice 
Toast Points (recipe follows) 


1. Place the mushrooms in a bowl; pour the boiling 
water over. Cover; let steep until soft, about 15 minutes. 
Strain through a sieve, reserving the liquid. 
Finely chop the mushrooms. 
2. Meanwhile, in a large saute pan, melt 1 tablespoon 
of the butter over medium-high heat. Add half 
the chicken livers and half the thyme; season with 
salt and pepper. Saute until the livers are lightly 
browned on the outside and light pink on the inside, 
6 to 7 minutes, adding half the garlic after 5 minutes. Remove from heat; stir in 1/2 tablespoon of the 
brandy. Transfer the mixture and all juices to a large 
bowl. Repeat with the remaining livers. 

3. Melt 2 tablespoons of the butter in the pan; add 
the bread cubes and reserved mushroom liquid, 
scraping up browned bits from the bottom of the 
pan. Combine with the liver mixture. Working in 
batches if necessary, transfer the mixture to the 
bowl of a food processor fitted with the metal blade. 
Process until smooth, about 3 minutes. Add lemon 
juice; adjust seasoning. Transfer to a 2-cup dish. 
4. Melt the remaining butter in a small saucepan 
over low heat. Skim off the white foam from the surface; 
discard. Drizzle the melted butter butter over 
the pate; refrigerate, covered, until the butter is set, 
at least 1 hour and up to 4 days. Bring to room temperature 
before serving; scrape off the butter, if desired. 
Serve with toast points. 








cheese balls three ways 

MAKES THREE 4-INCH CHEESE BALLS 

Make all three flavored balls, or prepare just one 
or two, adjusting the ingredients accordingly. 

base recipe 

1/2 cup (1 stick) unsalted butter, softened 
3 packages cream cheese (8 ounces each) 


2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 
1/2 teaspoon Worcestershire sauce 


5 dashes hot sauce (such as Tabasco) 
1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 


1/4 teaspoon freshly ground white pepper 

cheddar and cranberry 

8 ounces sharp orange Cheddar cheese, 
finely shredded 


2 tablespoons store-bought chutney 

3/4 cup dried cranberries, finely chopped 
Water crackers, for serving 

roquefort and walnut 

6 ounces Roquefort cheese 
1 shallot, minced (about 1 tablespoon) 


2 teaspoons brandy (optional) 
1 cup toasted walnuts, coarsely chopped 


Vegetable chips (such as Terra Chips 
Sweets and Beets), for serving 

goat cheese and scallions 

8 ounces goat cheese 
2 tablespoons finely chopped scallions 


1/3 cup finely chopped fresh curly-leaf 
parsley 


1 English cucumber, cut into  -thick 
slices, for serving 


1. Put the butter, cream cheese, lemon juice, Worcestershire 
sauce, hot sauce, salt, and pepper into the 
bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment; 
mix on medium speed until combined. 
Divide equally among 3 medium bowls. 
2. Stir the Cheddar and chutney with the base mixture 
in the first bowl. Form into a ball. If not using 
immediately, refrigerate up to 3 days or freeze up 
to 1 month. Roll the cheese ball in the cranberries 
to coat before serving. Serve with crackers. 
74 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


3. Stir the Roquefort and shallot with the base mixture 
in the second bowl; add brandy, if desired. Form 
into a ball. If not using immediately, refrigerate up 
to 3 days; freeze up to 1 month. Roll in the walnuts 
to coat before serving. Serve with chips. 
4. Stir the goat cheese and scallions with the base 
mixture in the remaining bowl. Form into a ball. If 
not using immediately, refrigerate up to 3 days or 
freeze up to 1 month. Roll in the parsley to coat before 
serving. Serve with cucumber slices. 








lemon-parsley gougeres 

MAKES 60 

6 tablespoons unsalted butter 

1 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/4 teaspoon cayenne pepper 


3/4 cup all-purpose flour 
5 large eggs 
Zest of 1 lemon 
3 scallions, finely chopped 


3 tablespoons finely chopped fresh curly- 
leaf parsley 


1. Bring 1 cup water and the butter, salt, and 
cayenne to a boil in a heavy 4-quart saucepan; boil 
until the butter has melted. Remove from heat; stir 
in the flour. Return to the burner; cook, stirring, until 
the mixture comes together and pulls away from 
the pan, about 2 minutes more. 
2. Remove from heat. Using a wooden spoon, beat 
in 4 of the eggs, 1 at a time, until they are incorporated 
and smooth. Stir in the lemon zest, scallions, 
and parsley. 
3. Transfer the mixture to a piping bag, and cut a 
  opening. Pipe   rounds onto baking 
sheets lined with parchment paper. Alternatively, 
drop rounded teaspoons of batter onto baking 
sheets lined with parchment. If not using immediately, 
freeze up to 1 month in airtight containers 
or resealable plastic bags. 
4. Preheat oven to 400 degrees F. Whisk together the remaining 
egg and 1 teaspoon water in a small bowl; 
lightly brush on top of each puff. Bake until lightly 
golden brown, about 20 minutes. Serve immediately. 










goat cheese and 
pistachio-stuffed dates 

MAKES 16 

4 ounces soft goat cheese 

3 tablespoons shelled salted pistachios, 
toasted and coarsely chopped 


1 tablespoon finely chopped fresh chives, 
plus more for garnish 


Freshly ground pepper 

8 plump soft dried dates


1. Stir together the goat cheese, 2 tablespoons of 
the pistachios, and the chives in a small bowl until 
smooth. Season with pepper. 
2. Arrange the dates, cut side up, on a platter. Fit a 
pastry bag with a large round tip, and fill it with the 
goat cheese mixture. Pipe the mixture onto each 
date half to cover. (Alternatively, pipe the goat 
cheese mixture using a resealable plastic bag with 
1 inch cut from one corner, or simply spread the 
mixture on the dates with a butter knife.) Garnish 
the dates with the remaining tablespoon pistachios 
and more chives. 










fruits de mer platter 

SERVES 6 TO 8 

1/2 bottle dry white wine 
1/4 cup coarse salt or sea salt 


2 lemons, halved 
1 teaspoon paprika 


1 teaspoon coriander seeds 
1 teaspoon celery seed 


3 bay leaves 

for the fruits de mer 

2 live lobsters (each 11/4 pounds) 
6 king crab legs (13/4 pounds total) 


2 pounds large shrimp in shells 
24 oysters 


12 littleneck clams 

for serving 

Crushed ice 

2 to 4 ounces caviar, such as North 
American osetra 
Toast Points (page 74) 


Saffron Mayonnaise (recipe follows) 
Classic Cocktail Sauce (recipe follows) 

Mignonette Sauce (recipe follows) 
Lemon wedges 


1. Make the court bouillon: Prepare a large ice-water 
bath. Fill a 3-gallon pot with cold water. Add the 
wine, salt, lemons, paprika, coriander seeds, celery 
seed, and bay leaves. Bring to a boil. 
2. Cook the seafood: Add the lobsters, head first, to 
the court bouillon. Cover; return to a boil. Cook 10 
minutes. Using tongs, transfer the lobsters to the 
ice-water bath. Add the crab legs to the court bouillon. 
Return to a boil; cook 8 minutes. Transfer the 
lobsters to a plate; immediately add the crab legs 
to the ice-water bath, adding more ice as needed. 
Add the shrimp to the court bouillon. Return to a 
boil; cook until the shrimp are pink and opaque, 
about 3 minutes. Add the shrimp to the ice-water 
bath; let the crab legs and shrimp cool completely. 
Transfer to a plate. 

3. Separate the tails, claws, and knuckles from the 
lobsters; using kitchen shears or a knife, split 
the tails lengthwise through the shells, then 
halve crosswise. Crack the claws and knuckles 
so the meat can be easily removed. Separate the 
crab legs at the knuckles. Using kitchen shears, 
cut away a piece of shell so the meat can be 
easily removed. Peel and devein the shrimp, leaving 
the tails intact. Transfer the lobster pieces, 
crab legs, and shrimp to a rimmed baking sheet; 
wrap tightly in plastic. Refrigerate until ready to 
serve, or overnight. 
4. Assemble the platter: Just before serving, fill 
a 3tiered glass serving stand with crushed ice. 
Shuck the oysters and clams; set them flat on 
the bottom tier so the juices do not spill. Arrange 
the lobsters and shrimp on the middle tier. 
Put the caviar into a small bowl, and set it in the 
center of the top tier; arrange the crab legs 
around the caviar. Serve with toast points, saffron 
mayonnaise, the cocktail sauce, mignonette 
sauce, and lemon wedges. 








saffron mayonnaise 

MAKES ABOUT 1 CUP 

You can use store-bought mayonnaise, if you like; 
skip step 1. 

1 large egg 

Pinch of dried mustard 
Coarse salt 


1/2 cup light olive oil 
1/2 cup canola oil 


1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon fresh 
lemon juice 


1/4 teaspoon saffron threads 

1. Process the egg, mustard, and 1/4 teaspoon salt 
in a food processor until pale and foamy, about 11/2 
minutes. Combine the oils; with the machine running, 
add the oil, drop by drop, through the feed 
tube until the mixture begins to thicken (about 
1/4 cup oil; do not stop the machine). Add the remaining 
oil in a slow, steady stream, processing 
until incorporated. Gradually add 1 tablespoon of 
the lemon juice. 

2. Grind the saffron with a mortar and pestle. Transfer 
to a bowl. Add the remaining teaspoon lemon 
juice; let stand until the liquid turns yellow, 5 minutes. 
Strain; discard the saffron threads. 
3. Put the mayonnaise into a small bowl; drizzle in 
the saffron liquid, stirring. Season with salt, if desired. 
Cover; refrigerate until ready to serve, or overnight. 









classic cocktail sauce 

MAKES ABOUT 1 CUP 

If using prepared horseradish, reduce the amount 
of lemon juice to 1 tablespoon. 

2 tablespoons grated peeled fresh 
horseradish (or prepared horseradish) 


2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 

1/4 teaspoon coarse salt 

3/4 cup ketchup 
1/4 teaspoon hot sauce (optional) 

Stir together the horseradish, lemon juice, and salt 
in a small bowl. Stir in the ketchup and hot sauce, 
if desired. Cover; refrigerate until ready to serve, or 
overnight. 








mignonette sauce 

MAKES ABOUT 1 CUP 

1 shallot, finely chopped 
11/2 teaspoons coarsely ground pepper 

1/2 cup sherry vinegar 

1/2 cup champagne vinegar or white 
wine vinegar 


Stir together the shallot, pepper, and vinegars. Let 
stand 20 minutes before serving. 

thyme-cheddar twists 

MAKES 18 

1 cup milk 

4 tablespoons sugar 

2 envelopes active dry yeast 
(2 scant tablespoons) 


3 cups all-purpose flour, plus more 
for dusting 


1 teaspoon salt 

8 tablespoons (1 stick) cold unsalted 
butter, cut into pieces, plus 3 tablespoons 
unsalted butter, melted 


3 large egg yolks 
Vegetable oil, for bowl 


11/2 cups coarsely grated sharp white 
Cheddar cheese (about 4 ounces) 

2 tablespoons chopped fresh thyme 

2 teaspoons freshly ground pepper 

1 large egg beaten with 1 tablespoon 
water, for egg wash 


1. Heat the milk in a small saucepan over medium 
heat until it registers 110 degrees F on an instant-read thermometer; 
transfer to a bowl. Stir in 2 tablespoons 
of the sugar. Sprinkle with yeast; let mixture stand 
until foamy, about 10 minutes. 
2. Process the flour, remaining 2 tablespoons sugar, 
salt, and butter pieces in a food processor until the 
mixture resembles coarse meal. Add the milk mixture 
and the yolks; process until combined. Transfer 
to a well-oiled bowl; cover with plastic wrap. 
Refrigerate 4 hours or overnight. 
3. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. On a lightly floured 
work surface, roll out the dough to form a 15 x 18inch 
rectangle. Brush the surface with melted butter. 
Sprinkle the dough evenly with cheese, thyme, 
and pepper. 
4. Fold the dough in half horizontally. Roll out to 
form a 10 x 18-inch rectangle. Cut into 10-inch-long, 
 -wide strips. 
5. Twist 2 strips around each other; pinch the edges 
to keep the strips from unraveling. Shape the twist 
to form a spiral; transfer to a baking sheet lined with 
parchment paper. Repeat with the remaining strips. 
6. Brush the twists with egg wash. Bake until deep 
golden brown, 20 to 22 minutes. 
STARTERS 79 









polenta squares with prosciutto 

MAKES 48 

Coarse salt 

2 cups yellow cornmeal 

2 teaspoons extra-virgin olive oil, 
plus more for the pan 


6 slices prosciutto, cut into   pieces 
1 garlic clove, finely chopped 


Freshly ground pepper 

6 ounces Taleggio cheese, cut into   
cubes (48 pieces) 


Fresh marjoram sprigs, for garnish 

1. Bring 7 cups water to a boil in a large saucepan; 
add 4 teaspoons salt. Whisking constantly, add the 
cornmeal, a little at a time. Reduce the heat to 
medium-low; cook, stirring frequently with a wooden 
spoon, until the polenta pulls away from the sides 
of the pan and is very thick, about 25 minutes. 
2. Heat the oil in a medium skillet over medium-
low heat until hot but not smoking. Add the prosciutto 
and garlic. Cook, stirring, until the prosciutto 
is slightly crisp, about 5 minutes; stir into the polenta. 
Season with salt and pepper, if desired. 
3. Pour the polenta mixture into a 9 x 1  baking 
pan; smooth with a dampened spatula. Let cool 
at least 1 hour. 
4. If not serving the polenta immediately, cover it 
with plastic wrap, and refrigerate until ready to use 
(or overnight). 
5. Trim 1/4 inch from all sides of the polenta. Cut 
into 48 squares. Preheat the broiler with the rack 5 
inches from the heat. Lightly brush a metal baking 
pan with oil; heat under the broiler 30 seconds. 
In batches, broil the squares in the pan, 2 minutes. 
Place a cheese cube on each square; season with 
pepper. Broil until the cheese is melted, about 11/2 
minutes. Garnish with marjoram sprigs. 







pita crisps with 
feta-radish spread 

SERVES 4 

The thick consistency of Greek yogurt is ideal for 
this spread. If your grocer doesn't sell it, use another 
whole-milk yogurt, and drain it for 30 minutes 
in a fine sieve set over a bowl. You can make 
the spread one day ahead and refrigerate it (cover 
with plastic wrap); wait until just before serving 
to stir in the parsley and radishes. 

5 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

2 pocket pitas, split open 

1 package sheep's-milk feta cheese 
(8 ounces), coarsely chopped 


1/4 cup plain whole-milk yogurt, 
preferably Greek 


2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 

3 tablespoons coarsely chopped fresh 
flat-leaf parsley 


4 radishes, quartered and thinly sliced 
(about 1/2 cup) 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Using 2 tablespoons 
of the oil, brush the insides of the pita rounds. Cut 
each round into 6 wedges. Arrange the wedges in 
a single layer on a baking sheet, oiled side up; toast 
until golden brown and crisp, 7 to 10 minutes. 
2. Meanwhile, pulse the feta, yogurt, lemon juice, 
and remaining 3 tablespoons oil in a food processor 
just until the mixture is thick and spreadable, 
about 10 pulses. Transfer to a medium bowl, and stir 
in the parsley and radishes. Serve with pita crisps. 
80 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 









popovers with 
wild mushroom sauce 

MAKES 12 

We used morel mushrooms, a spring variety 
known for its nutty flavor and pitted flesh, but 
any wild mushrooms, an assortment, or even cultivated 
mushrooms will also make a nice sauce. 
You can prepare the popover batter in advance, 
and refrigerate it for up to one day. Let it stand at 
room temperature for 20 minutes before baking. 
The sauce can also be made one day ahead. Let it 
cool completely, then refrigerate. Reheat over 
medium-low heat, adding heavy cream to thin, if 
necessary. If you have leftovers, keep them in an 
airtight container for up to one day. 

2 cups whole milk 

4 large eggs 
2 tablespoons unsalted butter
2 cups all-purpose flour 


2 teaspoons coarse salt, plus more 
for seasoning 


1/2 cup vegetable oil or vegetable shortening 

4 shallots, finely chopped 

2 pounds fresh wild mushrooms, such as 
morels, halved, or quartered if large 


3/4 cup medium-dry sherry 
3 cups heavy cream 

2 tablespoons finely chopped 
fresh tarragon 


Freshly ground pepper 

1. Whisk together the milk, eggs, and melted butter 
in a medium bowl; set aside. Whisk together the 
flour and salt in a separate medium bowl. Pour the 
milk mixture into the flour mixture; whisk until 
blended. Cover; let the batter stand 1 hour. 
2. Preheat the oven to 450 degrees F. Put 2 teaspoons of the 
oil into each cup of 2 standard 6-cup popover pans 
or a large (each cup having a 1-cup capacity) 12-cup 
muffin tin. Place the pans on a rimmed baking 
sheet. Transfer to the oven; heat the oil in the pans 
20 minutes. 
3. Pour the batter into the popover cups, filling each 
two-thirds full. Bake (do not open the oven while 
popovers cook) 15 minutes. Reduce the oven temperature 
to 350 degrees F; continue to bake the popovers until 
well browned and crusty, about 20 minutes more. Invert 
the popovers to unmold. Transfer to a bowl lined 
with a clean kitchen towel; cover to keep warm. 
4. Meanwhile, heat the remaining 8 tablespoons 
butter in a large skillet over medium heat. Add the 
shallots; cook, stirring occasionally, until fragrant, 
about 2 minutes. Add the mushrooms; cook, stirring 
occasionally, until golden, about 5 minutes. 
Add the sherry; cook until the liquid is reduced by 
half, about 2 minutes. Raise heat to medium-high; 
add the cream, and bring to a boil, stirring. Reduce 
heat to low, and simmer 1 minute. Stir in the tarragon, 
and season with salt and pepper. 
5. To serve, place the popovers on plates, and spoon 
mushroom sauce on top. 

















prosciutto crostini and 
fresh figs with gorgonzola 


MAKES 20 OF EACH HORS D'OEUVRE 

If you can't find lemon thyme, use small, fresh 
basil leaves instead. 

1/2 baguette 

2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

10 ounces Gorgonzola dolce, room 
temperature 


1/4 pound prosciutto, very thinly sliced and 
torn into bite-size pieces 


Fresh lemon thyme, for garnish 
10 fresh figs, halved lengthwise 


Fresh tarragon, for garnish 

1. Preheat the broiler. Cut the baguette into 20 slices 
(each about 1/4 inch thick); transfer to a baking sheet. 
Brush the tops with oil. Broil until golden, 1 to 
2 minutes. 
2. Let cool, then spoon 1 teaspoon cheese onto 
each round. Top with prosciutto; garnish with 
lemon thyme. 
3. Spoon about 1 teaspoon cheese onto each fig half; 
garnish with tarragon. 







vietnamese summer rolls 

MAKES 12 

12 8-inch round rice paper wrappers 

36 large shrimp, boiled until cooked through, 
peeled, deveined, and halved lengthwise 


3 ounces thin dried rice stick noodles, 
prepared per package instructions 


2 medium carrots, peeled into ribbons 
4 cups mache 


2 cups fresh mint leaves 
2 cups fresh cilantro leaves 


Sweet and Sour Dipping Sauce 
(recipe follows) 


1. Soak a wrapper in warm water for 30 seconds; immediately 
lay it flat on a work surface. Lay 6 shrimp 
halves, cut side up, on the bottom third, leaving a 
  border; top with 2 tablespoons each noodles, 
carrot, mache, mint, and cilantro. 
2. Fold the bottom of the wrapper over the fillings; 
roll over once, tuck in the sides, and roll. Cut in half; 
cover with a damp paper towel. Repeat to make remaining 
rolls. Serve with the dipping sauce. 











sweet and sour dipping sauce 

MAKES ABOUT 1/2 CUP 

1 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes 
1/4 cup fresh lime juice (about 2 limes) 


1 tablespoon minced garlic 
3 tablespoons sugar 


1/4 cup Asian fish sauce (such as nam pla) 

Soak the red pepper flakes in the lime juice for 4 minutes. 
Add the garlic, sugar, and fish sauce; stir until 
the sugar is dissolved. 














grilled bread with chimichurri 

SERVES 6 

Ciabatta, a long, flat Italian bread, is ideal for this 
recipe, but you could also use a rustic round loaf; 
instead of splitting it horizontally, cut 6 1 thick 
slices. You can refrigerate leftover chimichurri 
in an airtight container for up to 2 days. 

1/2 cup plus 2 tablespoons olive oil 

1 medium onion, thinly sliced 
1/2 cup packed fresh flat-leaf parsley leaves 
1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 


2 tablespoons red-wine vinegar 
2 tablespoons packed fresh cilantro leaves 
1 tablespoon fresh oregano leaves 
1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice 
2 garlic cloves, finely chopped 


1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 
1/2 teaspoon ground cumin 
1/8 teaspoon cayenne pepper 


1 loaf ciabatta, halved horizontally 

1. Heat 1 tablespoon of the oil in a medium skillet 
over medium heat until hot but not smoking. Add 
the onion, and stir to coat. Cook, stirring, until softened, 
3 to 4 minutes. Reduce heat to low, and continue 
to cook, stirring occasionally, until golden 
brown, 7 to 8 minutes more. Let cool. 
2. Make the chimichurri: Process the onion, parsley, 
salt, vinegar, cilantro, oregano, lemon juice, garlic, 
pepper, cumin, cayenne, and 5 tablespoons of 
the oil in a food processor until the ingredients are 
finely chopped and the mixture comes together, 
about 15 seconds. Set aside. 
3. Preheat a grill to medium-high (if using a charcoal 
grill, the coals are ready when you can hold 
your hand 5 inches above the grill for just 3 to 4 seconds). 
Using the remaining 1/4 cup oil, brush the cut 
sides of the bread. Grill, cut side down, without turning, 
until underside is lightly charred, about 4 minutes. 
Cut each bread half crosswise into 3 pieces, 
and spread each piece with chimichurri. 







spiked clams and oysters 

SERVES 6 

Using tequila as a steaming liquid enhances the 
flavor of the clams and oysters, but it's fine to use 
water instead. Setting the skillet over a grill gives 
the dish a touch of smokiness, or you can use 
your stove turned to medium-high heat. 

1/2 cup tequila 

12 littleneck clams (about 11/4 pounds), 
scrubbed well 


12 oysters, such as Malpeque or bluepoint 
(about 2 pounds), scrubbed well 


Chipotle Mayonnaise (recipe follows) 

Bloody Mary Sauce (recipe follows) 

Lime-Mint Sauce (recipe follows) 

1. Preheat a grill to medium-high (if using a charcoal 
grill, the coals are ready when you can hold 
your hand 5 inches above the grill for just 3 to 4 seconds). 
Pour the tequila into a medium cast-iron skillet. 
Add the clams and oysters; tightly cover the 
skillet with foil. Transfer the skillet to the grill. 
2. Cook the oysters and clams until they open 
(check frequently after 8 minutes, lifting a corner 
of the foil with tongs). Using the tongs, transfer the 
clams and oysters as they open to serving bowls; continue 
to cook until all the oysters and clams are open, 
up to 5 minutes more. (Discard any that remain 
closed.) Serve with chipotle mayonnaise and sauces. 









chipotle mayonnaise 

MAKES ABOUT 1 CUP 

3/4 cup mayonnaise 
1 tablespoon chipotle chiles in adobo 

1 teaspoon fresh lime juice 

1/8 teaspoon ground cumin 

1 garlic clove 

Coarse salt 

Process the mayonnaise, chipotles, lime juice, cumin, 
and garlic in a food processor until smooth. Season 
with salt. If not serving immediately, refrigerate in 
an airtight container up to 4 days. 











bloody mary sauce 

MAKES ABOUT 2/3 CUP 

1/2 pint cherry tomatoes (about 1 cup) 

11/2 teaspoons Worcestershire sauce 
1/4 teaspoon hot sauce, such as Tabasco 

11/2 teaspoons fresh lemon juice 

1 small celery stalk, chopped, plus leaves 
for garnish (optional) 


Coarse salt 

11/2 teaspoons finely grated peeled fresh 
horseradish, or prepared horseradish 
to taste 

1. Blend the tomatoes, Worcestershire sauce, hot 
sauce, lemon juice, and celery in a blender until 
smooth. Transfer the tomato puree to a small 
saucepan, and season with salt. 
2. Cook over medium heat, stirring occasionally, 
until the puree is reduced slightly, about 8 minutes. 
3. Pass the puree through a fine sieve set over a 
bowl, pressing on the solids to extract the liquid; 
discard the solids. Stir in the horseradish. (If not 
serving immediately, refrigerate in an airtight container 
up to 1 day.) Just before serving, garnish the 
sauce with celery leaves, if desired. 










lime-mint sauce 

MAKES 1 CUP 

1/4 cup fresh lime juice


1/2 cup packed fresh mint leaves 

3 tablespoons sugar 

3 tablespoons tequila 

1. Bring the lime juice, zest, mint, sugar, and 1/2 cup 
water to a boil in a small saucepan. Remove from 
heat; cover, and let steep until completely cooled, 
20 to 25 minutes. 
2. Pass the lime juice mixture through a fine sieve 
set over a bowl, pressing on the solids to extract the 
liquid; discard the solids. (If not serving immediately, 
refrigerate in an airtight container up to 
1 day.) Just before serving, stir in tequila. 
STARTERS 83 







oysters with serrano chile, 
avocado, and cherry tomatoes 

SERVES 4 

1 dozen fresh oysters, scrubbed, shucked, 
and left on the half shell 


1 serrano chile, very thinly sliced 
1 ripe avocado


6 cherry tomatoes, quartered 

Arrange the oysters on a bed of crushed ice. Top 
each with a piece of chile, some avocado, and 
2 tomato quarters, and serve. 

marinated olives with 
oregano and fennel seeds 

MAKES 3 CUPS 

The olives can be prepared three days ahead and 
refrigerated, covered. Bring to room temperature 
before serving. 

11/4 pounds assorted brine-cured olives

3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
1 teaspoon fennel seeds, crushed 


21/2 tablespoons chopped fresh oregano 
1 garlic clove, thinly sliced 

Stir together the olives, oil, fennel seeds, oregano, 
and garlic in a medium bowl. Cover, and let stand 
at room temperature, stirring occasionally, 1 hour. 







ham and gruyere thumbprints 

MAKES 36 

1/2 cup (1 stick) unsalted butter, 
cut into large pieces 


1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 
1 cup all-purpose flour 


4 large eggs 
1/2 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 


1/2 cup finely chopped or ground 
Black Forest ham (2 ounces) 


1 cup finely shredded Gruyere cheese

1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Bring the butter, salt, 
and 1 cup water to a boil in a large, heavy saucepan 
over medium heat, stirring occasionally (the butter 
will melt). Add the flour; stir vigorously until incorporated. 
Continue to cook, stirring, until the mixture 
pulls away from the sides and a thin film forms 
on the bottom of the pan, 1 to 2 minutes. Remove 
from heat; let cool 5 minutes. 
2. Transfer the dough to a large bowl; add the eggs, 
one at a time, beating with a wooden spoon to incorporate 
each egg before adding the next, about 
2 minutes. Stir in pepper, ham, and shredded cheese. 
3. Spoon dough into a pastry bag fitted with a   
star tip. On a baking sheet lined with a Silpat baking 
mat or parchment paper, pipe 1 -wide 
rosettes, 1 inch apart. Make a deep indentation in 
the center of each with your thumb (dampen the 
thumb to keep it from sticking to the dough). Bake 
until crisp and golden, 25 to 30 minutes. Transfer 
thumbprints to a wire rack to cool completely. Press 
a cheese cube into center of each. 
4. Place on clean baking sheets; freeze (uncovered) 
until firm, about 1 hour. Transfer to an airtight container; 
freeze until ready to use, up to 6 weeks. 
5. To serve, preheat the oven to 425 degrees F. Place the 
thumbprints on ungreased baking sheets; bake 
until heated through and cheese is melted, 10 to 
14 minutes. Serve warm. 
84 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 








asian mini crab cakes 

MAKES ABOUT 24 

8 ounces jumbo lump crabmeat, picked over 
and rinsed 
1/4 cup mayonnaise, plus 3 tablespoons for 
garnish 
2 scallions, trimmed and finely chopped 
2 tablespoons soy sauce 
2 teaspoons wasabi paste 
1 teaspoon finely grated lime zest 
1/2 cup plus 2 tablespoons plain bread crumbs 
1/2 cup all-purpose flour 
1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/2 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 
2 large eggs 
1/4 cup sesame seeds 

2/3 cup vegetable oil, plus more if needed 
1 English cucumber, for garnish 
1/2 cup drained pickled ginger, for garnish 


1. Flake the crabmeat with a fork in a medium bowl; 
stir in 1/4 cup of the mayonnaise and the scallions, 
the soy sauce, 1/2 teaspoon of the wasabi, and the 
zest. Stir in 2 tablespoons of the bread crumbs. 
Cover with plastic wrap; chill 1 hour. 
2. In a medium bowl, whisk the flour, salt, and pepper; 
set aside. In a small bowl, beat the eggs with 1 
tablespoon water; set aside. In a shallow bowl, stir 
together the sesame seeds and remaining 1/2 cup 
bread crumbs. 
3. Form 1 scant tablespoon crab mixture into a ball; 
dip in the seasoned flour. Flatten into a  -high 
cake about 11/4 inches in diameter. Repeat with the 
remaining crab mixture. Dip the cakes in the egg 
mixture, then roll in the bread crumb mixture. 

4. Heat the oil in a large skillet over medium heat 
until hot but not smoking. Add half the crab cakes; 
cook, turning once, until golden and crisp on both 
sides, about 11/2 minutes. Using a slotted spatula, 
transfer to paper-towel-lined plates to drain. Repeat 
with the remaining cakes, adding more oil if 
needed. Let cool completely. 
5. Transfer to a parchment-lined baking sheet. 
Freeze (uncovered) until firm, about 1 hour. Transfer 
to an airtight container; freeze up to 6 weeks. 
6. To serve, preheat the oven to 425 degrees  F. Place the 
crab cakes on an ungreased baking sheet, and bake 
until heated through, 10 to 14 minutes. 
7. Meanwhile, stir together the remaining 3 tablespoons 
mayonnaise and 11/2 teaspoons wasabi. 
Using a vegetable peeler, make 24 2 x   ribbons 
from the cucumber. Fold each into thirds. 
8. Dot each crab cake with 1/2 teaspoon wasabi mayonnaise; 
top with cucumber and ginger. 













mini chicken b'steeyas 

MAKES 54 

4 tablespoons vegetable oil 

1 whole boneless and skinless chicken 
breast (about 10 ounces), halved 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
1 onion, finely chopped 


1/2 teaspoon ground ginger 
1/4 teaspoon ground turmeric 


11/2 teaspoons ground cinnamon, plus 
more for dusting 

3/4 cup confectioners' sugar, plus more 
for dusting 
2 large eggs, lightly beaten 

1/4 cup golden raisins, finely chopped 
(optional) 


1/2 cup whole blanched almonds 
(2 ounces), toasted 


12 sheets (17 x 12 inches each) frozen 
phyllo dough, thawed 


1/2 cup (1 stick) unsalted butter, melted, 
for brushing 


1. Heat 1 tablespoon of the oil in a medium skillet 
over medium heat. Season the chicken with salt and 
pepper on both sides; cook, turning once, until just 
cooked through, about 10 minutes. Transfer to a 
plate; let cool, then finely chop. Transfer the chicken 
and any juices to a large bowl. Set aside. 
2. Heat the remaining 3 tablespoons oil in the same 
skillet over medium heat. Add the onion; cook, stirring 
occasionally, until softened, about 4 minutes. 
Add the ginger, turmeric, and 1/2 teaspoon of the cinnamon; 
cook, stirring, until fragrant, about 1 minute. 
3. Stir 1/4 cup of the sugar into the mixture. Add the 
eggs; cook, stirring, until they are scrambled but 
still moist. Transfer to the bowl with the chicken. 
Stir in the raisins, if desired. Season with salt and 
pepper; let cool. 
4. In a food processor, pulse the nuts until finely 
ground. Transfer to a bowl; stir in the remaining 1/2 
cup sugar and 1 teaspoon cinnamon. 
5. On a clean work surface, unfold a sheet of phyllo 
with a short side facing you; cover the remaining 
sheets with a damp kitchen towel. Lightly brush with 
melted butter; sprinkle with about one-sixth of the 
nut mixture. Lay another phyllo sheet on top; lightly 
brush with butter. Cut the stack lengthwise and then 
crosswise into thirds to make 9 equal rectangles. 
6. Working with one rectangle at a time, place 1 
tablespoon chicken mixture 1 inch from the end of 
a short side, leaving a   border on the long 
sides. Fold 1/2 inch of the long sides over filling. 
Starting from the end with the filling, roll into a log. 
Repeat the process to make 54 logs. Brush with butter, 
and arrange seam sides down on parchment-
lined baking sheets. 
7. Freeze (uncovered) until firm, about 1 hour. Transfer 
to airtight containers, and freeze until ready to 
use, up to 6 weeks. 
8. To serve, preheat oven to 425 degrees F. Place logs on 
parchment-lined baking sheets; bake, rotating 
sheets halfway through, until golden brown and 
crisp, 12 to 15 minutes. Let cool slightly before dusting 
with sugar and cinnamon. Serve warm. 








scallion tarts 

MAKES TWO 8-INCH-SQUARE TARTS 

All-purpose flour, for work surface 

1 standard package (17.3 ounces; 2 sheets) 
frozen puff pastry, thawed 


8 bunches scallions (21/4 pounds), trimmed 
and cut into matchsticks 


1 garlic clove, minced 

1 red Thai chile, ribs and seeds removed, 
minced 


1/2 cup walnuts (2 ounces), finely chopped 

1/2 cup kalamata olives, pitted and 
coarsely chopped 


2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


1 large egg yolk 

1/2 cup freshly grated Parmesan cheese 
(2 ounces) 


1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. On a lightly floured 
work surface, roll out the pastry sheets just to smooth 
creases; trim the edges slightly to make even. 
2. Place each sheet on a parchment-lined baking 
sheet. Freeze 20 minutes. 
3. Place the scallions, garlic, chile, walnuts, olives, 
and oil in a medium bowl. Season with salt and pepper; 
toss. Set aside. 
4. In a small bowl, whisk together the egg yolk and 
1 teaspoon water. Brush a   border around the 
edges of the dough with egg wash. Divide the scallion 
mixture between the sheets, leaving a   
border; sprinkle each with cheese. 
5. Bake until the crust is golden brown, about 30 
minutes. Transfer to a wire rack. Serve warm or at 
room temperature. 









shallot and date empanadas 

MAKES 12 
 

13/4 cups all-purpose flour, plus more for work 
surface 

11/2 teaspoons caraway seeds, coarsely 
chopped 

1 teaspoon sugar 

1 teaspoon table salt 

3/4 cup (11/2 sticks) chilled unsalted butter, 
cut into small pieces 
8 ounces cream cheese, well chilled 

2 tablespoons olive oil 

1 pound shallots, cut lengthwise into sixths 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

6 dried dates, pitted and quartered 

2 teaspoons fresh thyme 

1 large egg yolk 

1 tablespoon heavy cream 

1. In a food processor, pulse the flour, caraway 
seeds, sugar, and table salt several times to combine. 
Add the butter and cream cheese; pulse until 
the mixture just begins to come together. (Gently 
squeeze the dough; if it doesn't hold together, add 
1 tablespoon cold water.) Turn out the dough onto 
plastic wrap; flatten into a disk. Wrap, and refrigerate 
1 hour. 
2. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Line a baking sheet 
with parchment paper; set aside. Heat the oil in a 
medium skillet over medium heat. Add the shallots; 
cook, turning occasionally, until golden, about 10 
minutes. Season with coarse salt and pepper; remove 
the skillet from heat. 
3. On a generously floured work surface, roll out the 
dough to 1/8 inch thick. Using a 4-inch cookie cutter, 
cut out 12 rounds from the dough. Brush the border 
of one round with water. Place 2 date quarters 
STARTERS 87 


in the center of the round, then top with shallots, 
dividing evenly. Add a pinch of thyme; season with 
coarse salt and pepper. Bring three sides up and 
crimp together in the center, enclosing the filling. 
Pinch the edges to seal. Place on prepared baking 
sheet. Repeat with the remaining dough and filling. 
Freeze 15 minutes. 

4. In a bowl, beat together the egg yolk and cream. 
Brush the empanadas with egg wash. Bake until 
golden brown; about 30 minutes. Transfer to a wire 
rack. Serve warm or at room temperature. 









crisped haloumi cheese 

SERVES 6 TO 8 

Haloumi is a semihard cheese made from sheep's 
milk; look for it at Middle Eastern markets. 

5 teaspoons nonpareil capers, chopped 
Grated zest and juice of 1 lemon 
1 pound (2 packages) haloumi cheese 


1. In a small bowl, mix the capers with the lemon 
zest and juice; set aside. Slice each block of cheese 
crosswise into  -thick slices. 
2. Heat a nonstick skillet over medium heat. Working 
in batches, arrange the cheese slices in a single 
layer in the skillet. Cook until golden brown, 
about 3 minutes per side. Transfer to a serving dish; 
spoon the caper mixture over the cheese. Serve warm. 










dressed feta cheese 

SERVES 6 TO 8 

We particularly like the flavor and firm texture of 
Bulgarian feta cheese, which is easy to slice, but 
other types can also be used. 

1 pound feta cheese, drained well 

5 large sprigs fresh dill 

5 sprigs fresh flat-leaf parsley 

1 scallion, including green parts 

1 teaspoon whole pink peppercorns 

1 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes 

2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

1. Cut the feta into  -thick slices, wiping the 
knife each time to keep the cheese from crumbling. 
Arrange on a serving dish. 
2. Pick the leaves from the herbs, and chop finely. 
Slice the scallion into thin rounds. Combine herbs 
and scallion in a small bowl; stir in peppercorns, 
red pepper flakes, and 1 tablespoon of the oil. Spoon 
the herb mixture over the feta. Drizzle with the remaining 
tablespoon oil, and serve. 









mushroom crostini 

SERVES 4 

1 small (or 1/2 large) baguette 

2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil, plus 
more for brushing 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
1 shallot, thinly sliced into rings 


8 ounces chanterelles or other wild 
mushrooms, trimmed and coarsely 
chopped 


12 rounds (1/4 inch thick) goat cheese, cut 
from a log (about 6 ounces), room 
temperature 


Fresh chives, snipped, for garnish 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Cut the baguette crosswise 
into 12  -thick slices; place them on a 
baking sheet. Brush with oil; season with salt and 
pepper. Toast in the middle of the oven until golden, 
8 to 10 minutes. Set aside to cool. 
2. Heat 2 tablespoons oil in a medium skillet over 
medium heat. Add the shallot; cook, stirring, until 
soft, about 3 minutes. Add the mushrooms; cook, 
stirring occasionally, until tender and any juices 
have evaporated, 7 to 10 minutes. Season with salt 
and pepper. 
3. Place a round of goat cheese on top of each crostini; 
top with 1 tablespoon mushroom mixture. 
Sprinkle with chives. Serve warm. 
88 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 






tomatoes a la grecque 

SERVES 6 TO 8 

This dish can be prepared several hours ahead 
and served chilled or at room temperature. Peel 
and slice the cucumbers just before serving. 

2 pounds small ripe tomatoes 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1/4 cup olive oil 

1 garlic clove, minced 

1/4 cup white-wine vinegar 

1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice 

1/2 teaspoon ground coriander 

2 cucumbers 

1 tablespoon dried oregano, for garnish 

1. Slice the tomatoes lengthwise into quarters, 
through the stem. Place in a medium bowl; season 
with salt and pepper. 
2. Heat the oil in a small saucepan over medium 
heat. Add the garlic; cook, stirring, until soft but not 
browned, about 1 minute. Add the vinegar, lemon 
juice, and coriander. Let simmer 1 minute. 
3. Immediately pour the hot vinaigrette over the 
tomatoes, and let them marinate at room temperature 
until completely cooled. Alternatively, cover 
with plastic wrap and refrigerate until ready to serve. 
4. Just before serving, peel the cucumbers, leaving 
on stripes of skin for decoration, if desired. Halve 
the cucumbers lengthwise; scrape out the seeds with 
a spoon, and discard. Cut the cucumber into   
semicircles. Garnish the tomatoes with the oregano, 
and serve the cucumbers in a separate bowl. 










crostini with salt cod brandade 


SERVES 10 

1 pound choice-grade skinless and boneless 
salt cod 

4 garlic cloves, mashed 

1 cup heavy cream 

1/2 cup extra-virgin olive oil, plus more for 
drizzling 


1 tablespoon plus 2 teaspoons fresh lemon 
juice (about 1 lemon) 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1 baguette, sliced on the bias into  thick 
pieces 


1. Rinse the salt cod, and place it in a large reusable 
plastic container. Submerge the cod in cold water, 
and place, covered, in the refrigerator. Allow to soak 
overnight. Drain the cod, and replace the water with 
fresh cold water. Let soak overnight again. 
2. Remove the cod from the soaking liquid, and 
place it in a large pot. Cover with cold water, and 
bring to a boil over high heat. Reduce heat to low, 
and simmer 20 minutes. Drain cod; let cool, and 
break into large pieces. Transfer to a food processor; 
add garlic, and process until the mixture is 
coarsely chopped. 
3. In a small saucepan set over medium heat, warm 
the cream until hot; do not bring to a boil. While 
processing the cod mixture, slowly add the cream 
through the feed tube. Add the oil and lemon juice 
in the same manner; blend until creamy and fluffy. 
Season with salt and pepper. 
4. Heat the broiler with the rack placed in the upper 
third of the oven. Lay the baguette slices on a baking 
sheet; drizzle each slice with oil. Season with 
salt and pepper. Place the baking sheet under the 
broiler; toast the bread until the edges are lightly 
browned, about 1 minute. Remove from the oven; 
let cool. Spread the brandade on the crostini; serve. 
STARTERS 89 









stuffed clams 

MAKES 10 

clams are found mainly off the eastern 
coast of the United States; steamer clams may be 
used instead. 

1 baguette

1/4 pound chorizo

10 clams (about 5 pounds) 
1/3 cup olive oil 


10 garlic cloves, chopped (about 1/4 cup) 
2 onions, finely chopped (about 3 cups) 


1/2 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes 
2 large eggs 


2 tablespoons finely chopped fresh basil 
1 tablespoon finely chopped fresh oregano 


2 tablespoons finely chopped fresh flat- 
leaf parsley 


Freshly ground black pepper 

2 tablespoons unsalted butter, cut into 
small pieces 


1. Preheat the oven to 300 degrees F. Place the cubed bread 
on a rimmed baking sheet. Toast until dry, about 15 
minutes. Set aside. 
2. In a saute pan set over medium-high heat, cook 
the chorizo, stirring occasionally, until the fat is rendered 
and the chorizo is lightly browned, about 4 
minutes. Using a slotted spoon, remove the chorizo 
from the fat, and transfer it to a paper-towel-lined 
plate. Blot dry, and set aside. 
3. Under running water, scrub the clams clean. Place 
in a large stockpot, and add 2/3 cup water. Cover the 
pot, and place over high heat. Steam until all clams 
have opened, about 10 to 15 minutes. Remove the 
clams from the pot, discarding any that did not 
open; strain the broth through a paper-towel-lined 
fine strainer; set aside. 
4. Remove the meat from the shells. Chop into 1/4inch 
pieces; set aside. Separate the shells into 
halves; clean them thoroughly by boiling in a large 
pot of water for 5 minutes. Remove the shells from 
the pot; let cool. 
5. In a large saute pan set over medium heat, warm 
the olive oil. Cook the garlic, onions, and red pepper 
flakes, stirring, until the onions are soft and 
translucent, about 8 minutes. Let the mixture cool 
to room temperature. 
6. In a large mixing bowl, beat 1 cup reserved clam 
broth into the eggs. Add the onion mixture, clams, 
chorizo, and herbs; toss well. Add the bread cubes. 
Fold together until just mixed. Season with pepper. 
7. Heat the grill. Fill each clamshell with stuffing, 
about 1/4 to 1/3 cup filling per shell. Dot the top of 
each filled shell with butter. Place the clams, 
stuffing side up, on the grill; cook, covered, for 10 
minutes. Transfer to a serving plate; serve warm. 











bucheron with cucumbers, 
basil, and figs 

SERVES 6 

Bucheron is a tangy, mild goat cheese. We like to 
serve it drizzled with a deep, intensely flavored 
extra-virgin olive oil. 

1 baguette, halved lengthwise and 
cut into  -long pieces 


1/2 pound Bucheron or other soft goat 
cheese, sliced 


6 fresh figs, halved, for garnish 
3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 


2 cucumbers 
1 sprig basil, for garnish 


1. Preheat the oven to 300 degrees F. Arrange the bread 
slices on a baking sheet. Toast in the oven, turning 
once, until golden, about 5 minutes per side. Remove 
from the oven, and set aside on a serving plate. 
2. Arrange the cheese with the figs on serving 
plates. Allow to come to room temperature. Drizzle 
the oil over the cheese. Slice the cucumbers into 
spears, peeling the skins if waxy, and place, as desired, 
around the cheese. Garnish with basil. Serve 
with toast on the side. 
90 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


potato skins with 
pancetta and mixed herbs 

SERVES 10 TO 12 

Assembled wedges can be stored in the refrigerator, 
covered with plastic wrap, until ready to bake, 
up to 1 day. 

8 small to medium russet potatoes 

1 tablespoon olive oil 
1/2 pound pancetta, finely chopped 


4 tablespoons unsalted butter 

3 tablespoons finely chopped mixed fresh 
herbs, such as rosemary, sage, and thyme 


16 ounces white and/or yellow sharp 
Cheddar cheese, grated (about 2 cups) 


8 ounces fontina cheese, grated 
(about 1 cup) 


1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Place the potatoes on 
a baking sheet, and rub with the oil. Bake until tender 
when pierced with a paring knife, 55 to 60 minutes. 
Remove from the oven; let stand until cool 
enough to handle. Reduce oven temperature to 
350 degrees F. 
2. Cut each potato in half lengthwise, and use a 
small spoon to scoop out the insides, leaving about 
  border all around. Reserve the insides for 
another use. Slice each potato shell in half again 
lengthwise for a total of 32 wedges. 
3. In a medium skillet, cook the pancetta over 
medium heat, stirring frequently, until just starting 
to turn brown and crisp, 9 to 10 minutes. Remove 
from heat; use a slotted spoon to transfer the 
pancetta to drain on paper towels. Set aside. 
4. Melt the butter in a small saucepan. Brush each 
potato wedge with butter; sprinkle with herb mixture. 
Cover each wedge with about 1 tablespoon 
Cheddar cheese. Sprinkle each wedge with 1/2 teaspoon 
pancetta and a little more herb mixture. 
Sprinkle the remaining Cheddar and the fontina 
cheese over the tops. 
5. Bake until the cheese is melted and the potatoes 
are heated through, 8 to 10 minutes. Remove from 
the oven; serve hot. 













sesame crunch sticks 

MAKES ABOUT 54 

Serve with Hummus Dip (recipe follows). 

3 cups all-purpose flour, plus more for 
work surface 


2 teaspoons baking powder 

2 teaspoons salt 

1/2 cup (1 stick) chilled unsalted butter 
1 cup buttermilk 


11/4 cups sesame seeds, toasted 
1 large egg 

1 tablespoon sugar 

1 tablespoon soy sauce 

1. In the bowl of a food processor, pulse the flour, 
baking powder, and salt until combined. Add the 
butter; pulse until the mixture resembles coarse 
meal. Transfer to a medium bowl; stir in the buttermilk 
and 1 cup of the sesame seeds until the mixture 
forms a dough. Divide into quarters; wrap in 
plastic. Chill 20 minutes. 
2. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. In a small bowl, whisk 
together the egg, sugar, and soy sauce. Transfer one 
piece of dough to a lightly floured work surface; roll 
out into a rectangle about 1/8 inch thick. Use a sharp 
knife or pizza wheel to cut the rectangle into strips 
about 3/8 inch wide and 10 inches long. Brush the 
strips with egg mixture; sprinkle with the remaining 
1/4 cup sesame seeds. 
3. Arrange the strips on a parchment-lined baking 
sheet. Bake until just golden, 15 to 20 minutes. 
Transfer to a wire rack to cool. Repeat with remaining 
dough. 
STARTERS 91 












hummus dip 

MAKES 13/4 CUPS 

1 can (151/2 ounces) chickpeas, drained and 
rinsed 

1 large or 2 small garlic cloves, roughly 
chopped 


Pinch of ground cumin 

Pinch of ground nutmeg 
5 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 


2 tablespoons tahini 
1 tablespoon water, plus more as needed 


3 tablespoons fresh lemon juice (1 lemon) 

3/4 teaspoon coarse salt 

Combine all the ingredients in the bowl of a food 
processor; pulse until smooth and creamy, adding 
more water if needed. Transfer to a serving dish or 
airtight container, and place in the refrigerator, covered, 
until ready to serve, up to 5 days. Serve chilled 
or at room temperature. 





















bruschetta with fontina and 
asparagus 

SERVES 10 

Truffle oil can be found at most gourmet shops. 

1 loaf (about 3/4 pound) French bread, sliced 
into 10  -thick slices 

1 garlic clove, crushed 

2 tablespoons olive oil 
Coarse salt 


11/2 large bunches (11/4 pounds) asparagus, 
tough ends trimmed 

8 ounces fontina or Monterey Jack cheese, 
grated on the large holes of a box grater 
(about 2 cups) 


2 ounces Parmesan cheese, grated on the 
small holes of a box grater (about 1/4 cup) 


2 tablespoons truffle oil (optional) 

1. Heat the grill or broiler. Grill the bread slices until 
golden on both sides. Rub one side of each slice 
with garlic; brush lightly with oil. 
2. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Bring a large saucepan 
of water to a boil over high heat; add salt generously. 
Add the asparagus, and cook until tender, 
about 3 minutes. Drain the asparagus, and set aside. 
3. Place the toasted bread on a baking sheet, and 
sprinkle the fontina evenly over the slices. Arrange 
3 to 4 asparagus spears on top of each. Sprinkle the 
Parmesan over the asparagus, dividing evenly. 
4. Bake until the cheese has melted, about 10 minutes. 
Remove from the oven, and drizzle with truffle 
oil, if using. 
chickpea fritters 

MAKES ABOUT 20 

7 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
1 onion, finely diced 


2 tablespoons sesame seeds 
1 tablespoon ground cumin 
Pinch of cayenne pepper 


1 can (151/2 ounces) chickpeas, rinsed and 
drained 


2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 
1 large egg white 


1 teaspoon coarse salt, plus more for 
seasoning 


5 tablespoons all-purpose flour 
Tzatziki, for serving (opposite) 


1. In a medium saute pan, heat 3 tablespoons of the 
oil over medium heat. Add the onion; cook, stirring, 
until soft and translucent, about 3 minutes. Add the 
sesame seeds, cumin, and cayenne; cook, stirring, 
until the sesame seeds have begun to brown lightly 
and the spices are very fragrant, about 2 minutes; 
set aside. 
2. In a food processor, combine the chickpeas, 
lemon juice, egg white, salt, and 1 tablespoon of the 
oil. Pulse several times to form a semismooth paste. 
Transfer to a large bowl; stir in the onion mixture. 
Fold in the flour until just combined. Using your 
hands, form the batter into 1  patties, each 
about 1/3 inch thick. 
92 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


3. In a 1  saute pan, heat 2 tablespoons of the 
oil over medium-low heat. Cook half the patties, 
without flattening, until golden brown, about 3 minutes 
per side. Transfer the patties to a paper-
towel-lined plate, and season with salt. Repeat with 
remaining patties and tablespoon oil. Serve immediately 
with tzatziki. 








zucchini-scallion fritters 

MAKES ABOUT 28 

1 pound (about 2 medium) zucchini, grated 
on the large holes of a box grater 

21/2 teaspoons coarse salt, plus more for 
seasoning 

3 large scallions, thinly sliced 
1/4 cup finely chopped fresh dill 


1/2 cup finely chopped fresh mint 
3 large eggs, lightly beaten 


1/2 cup grated Kefalotyri cheese or Pecorino 
Romano 


5 tablespoons all-purpose flour 

3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
Tzatziki, for serving (recipe follows) 


1. In a colander, sprinkle the zucchini with 11/4 teaspoons 
of the salt; toss to combine, and let stand 
at room temperature 45 minutes. Transfer the zucchini 
to a clean kitchen towel; squeeze out any remaining 
juice. 
2. In a large bowl, combine the zucchini, the remaining 
11/4 teaspoons salt, and the scallions, dill, 
mint, eggs, and cheese. Fold in the flour until just 
combined. 
3. Line a large platter or baking sheet with paper 
towels; set aside. In a large saute pan, heat 2 tablespoons 
of the oil over medium-low heat. Using half 
the batter, drop heaping teaspoons directly into pan 
to create about 14 1  patties, each about 1/4 
inch thick. Cook the patties, without flattening, until 
golden brown, about 2 minutes per side. Using a 
slotted spatula, transfer the zucchini fritters to the 
paper-towel-lined platter, and season with salt. Repeat 
with the remaining batter and tablespoon oil. 
Serve immediately with tzatziki. 

tzatziki 

MAKES 2 CUPS 

1 English cucumber, cut into 11/2 x   
matchsticks 


11/2 teaspoons coarse salt, plus more for 
seasoning 

11/4 cups Greek yogurt or Strained Yogurt 
(recipe follows) 

1 large garlic clove, minced 

2 tablespoons white-wine vinegar 

2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

1/4 cup chopped fresh dill 

Freshly ground pepper 

1. In a colander, sprinkle the cucumber with 11/2 teaspoons 
salt; toss to combine. Let stand at room temperature 
30 minutes. 
2. In a medium bowl, combine the cucumber, yogurt, 
garlic, vinegar, oil, and dill. Season with salt 
and pepper. 






herb fritters 

SERVES 4 

Crisp herb fritters are an unusual way to savor 
fresh herbs. Dipped in beer batter, fried lightly in 
oil, and served with lemon wedges, they make a 
delightful accompaniment to a glass of wine. If 
the batter is too thick, thin with a little water; if it 
is too thin, add a little flour. 

2 large eggs, separated 

11/2 tablespoons vegetable oil, plus more 
for frying 

1/2 cup beer 

3/4 cup all-purpose flour 
3 ounces assorted herbs, such as basil, 
mint, sage, parsley, oregano, tarragon, 
and chives 


1 teaspoon coarse salt, plus more for 
seasoning 


1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 

1 lemon, cut into wedges 

1. Whisk together the yolks, oil, and beer in a bowl. 
Slowly add the flour, whisking until just combined. 
Set aside for 20 minutes. Wash and dry the herbs. 
Whisk the egg whites to soft peaks; fold into the 
beer batter. Add the salt and pepper. 
2. In a heavy-bottomed saucepan, heat 1 inch oil 
over medium heat until hot but not smoking, about 
375 degrees F on a fry thermometer. Dip each herb into the 
batter, shaking off excess, until lightly coated. Place 
the herbs in the oil, turning until golden, about 1 
minute. Drain on paper towels; season with salt. 
Serve with lemon wedges. 






shrimp and avocado seviche 

SERVES 8 TO 10 

4 limes 

2 pounds medium shrimp 
1/4 cup fresh lime juice (about 3 limes) 


6 scallions, trimmed and finely chopped 
2 to 4 serrano chiles, finely chopped 


1/4 cup cider vinegar 
2 teaspoons finely chopped fresh thyme 


1 teaspoon dried oregano, preferably 


2 large ripe avocados, peeled, pitted, 
and diced 


1/4 cup finely chopped fresh cilantro 
2 teaspoons salt 


Tortilla chips, for serving 

1. Fill a large pot with 1 quart water. Cut the 4 limes 
in half, and squeeze their juice into the pot; add the 
lime halves. Bring to a boil, then turn off heat; let 
the mixture steep about 10 minutes. Return to a boil. 
2. Add the shrimp to the pot. As soon as the water 
returns to a rolling boil, pour the shrimp mixture 
into a colander; discard the cooking liquid and 
limes. Return the shrimp to the pot; cover, and let 
stand 15 minutes. Transfer the shrimp to a baking 
sheet and spread them out; let stand until cool 
enough to handle. 
3. Peel and devein the shrimp, and cut them into 
thirds. Transfer to a medium bowl; stir in 1/4 cup lime 
juice and the scallions, chiles, vinegar, thyme, and 
oregano. Let stand at room temperature 1 hour, stirring 
occasionally. 
4. When ready to serve, stir the avocados, cilantro, 
and salt into shrimp mixture. Serve with tortilla chips. 
94 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


parmesan-dusted meatballs 

SERVES 8 TO 10 

1/3 cup plus 3 tablespoons sliced 
almonds, toasted 


11/2 teaspoons sugar 

3/4 cup plain bread crumbs 
1/4 cup milk 
1/2 pound ground beef chuck 


1/2 pound ground pork 
1 large egg, lightly beaten 


1/2 cup finely grated Parmesan cheese, 
plus more for garnish 


1/3 cup finely chopped fresh flat-leaf parsley 

3 tablespoons dried currants 

2 teaspoons salt 

1/8 teaspoon ground allspice 

3 tablespoons olive oil 

1. In a food processor, pulse 1/3 cup of the almonds 
with the sugar until finely ground. Coarsely chop 
the remaining almonds. 
2. In a bowl, mix the bread crumbs and milk. Add 
the almonds, beef, pork, egg, 1/2 cup Parmesan, parsley, 
currants, salt, and allspice. Mix until combined. 
Form into   balls. 
3. Heat 11/2 tablespoons of the olive oil in a heavy 
1  skillet over medium heat. Add half the meatballs, 
and saute until they are cooked through, 
about 7 minutes. Transfer the meatballs to a platter. 
Repeat with the remaining oil and meatballs. 
Garnish with Parmesan, and serve immediately. 










watermelon skewers 

SERVES 8 TO 10 

1/4 large seedless watermelon, cut 
into   cubes 


2 bunches fresh mint, leaves separated 

10 ounces ricotta salata, cut 
into   cubes 


Freshly ground pepper (optional) 

1. Arrange the melon cubes on a serving platter. 
Lay a mint leaf on top of each, then add a cheese 
cube. Insert skewers through each stack; sprinkle 
with pepper, if desired. 
2. Chill, covered, until ready to serve, up to 3 hours. 
blue cheese with crudites 

SERVES 6 

1 pound radishes (about 16) 

1 pound celery (about 8 stalks) 

1 wedge blue cheese (5 ounces), such as 
Danish blue, Stilton, or Gorgonzola 


Halve the radishes, if desired. Arrange the radishes, 
celery, and cheese on a platter. 

FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 109 CALORIES, 7 G FAT, 

18 MG CHOLESTEROL, 7 G CARBOHYDRATE, 428 MG SODIUM, 

6 G PROTEIN, 3 G FIBER 

roasted olives 

MAKES ABOUT 2 CUPS 

2 cups assorted brine-cured olives, rinsed 

1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil 
1/4 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes 


Pinch of freshly ground black pepper 
2 bay leaves 


3 rosemary sprigs 
4 strips orange zest (4 inches each) 


Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Stir all the ingredients 
in an 8-inch-square baking dish. Cover with foil; 
bake until fragrant and heated through, 20 to 30 
minutes. Serve warm. 

STARTERS 95 


caviar and chopped eggs 
on biscuits 

SERVES 8 

3 large eggs 

2 teaspoons Dijon mustard 

1 tablespoon mayonnaise 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
16 whole-wheat digestive biscuits 


2 50-gram tins of black caviar 
Freshly chopped chives, for garnish 


1. Place the eggs in a saucepan with enough cold 
water to cover by 2 inches. Bring to a boil over 
medium-high heat, cook for 1 minute, cover, and remove 
from heat. Let stand for 10 minutes. Drain the 
eggs, cover with ice, and place under cold running 
water to stop cooking. 
2. Peel the eggs; finely chop. Place in a bowl with 
the mustard and mayonnaise; stir to combine. Season 
with salt and pepper. 
3. To serve, place 1 rounded teaspoon egg mixture 
on a digestive biscuit, top with caviar, and garnish 
with chives. 
pork and mango rolls 

MAKES 24 

1/2 cup fish sauce 

1/4 cup canola oil 

1/4 cup rice wine vinegar 

1 stalk lemongrass, crushed 

2 cloves garlic, finely sliced 

1/2 inch piece ginger, finely sliced 
1 green chile pepper, finely sliced 


2 teaspoons freshly ground black pepper 

1 pork tenderloin (about 1 pound), 
silverskin trimmed 


6 8  rice paper wrappers 

1 bunch watercress, washed 

1/2 mango, peeled and cut into matchsticks 

1/2 small jicama, peeled and cut into 
matchsticks 


1 cup fresh basil leaves, washed and dried 

1. Make the marinade: Combine the fish sauce, 
canola oil, rice wine vinegar, lemongrass, garlic, 
ginger, chile pepper, and black pepper in a medium 
bowl. Transfer to a resealable plastic bag; add the 
pork, and refrigerate 3 hours or overnight. 
2. Preheat the grill or grill pan to medium. Remove 
the pork from the marinade. Place on the grill; cook, 
turning as necessary, until a meat thermometer registers 
160 degrees F. Remove from the grill; let cool. When 
cool enough to handle, slice the meat 1/8 inch thick. 
3. Dip a rice paper wrapper into a bowl of warm 
water for 5 seconds; transfer to a clean work surface 
(the wrapper will still feel hard but will soften as it 
sits). Lay watercress on the bottom third of the rice 
paper. Top with some pork, mango, jicama, and 
basil. Roll (you needn't tuck in ends). Place on a 
plate; cover with a damp paper towel. Continue filling 
and rolling rice paper until all the ingredients 
are used. Trim the ends; halve. Halve each half 
again on the diagonal to make hors d'oeuvres; serve. 
wild mushroom crackers 

MAKES ABOUT 7 DOZEN 

These crackers use powder made from dried 
mushrooms ground with a mortar and pestle or 
in a spice grinder. 

1/4 pound (1 stick) unsalted butter, room 
temperature 


1/2 pound (8 ounces) goat cheese 

2 cups all-purpose flour, plus more 
for dusting 


1/3 cup mushroom powder, from 3/4 ounce 
dried mushrooms 


1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 
1/4 cup milk 


Coarse salt 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. In the bowl of an electric 
mixer fitted with the paddle attachment, mix 
the butter and goat cheese on medium speed until 
well combined. Add the flour, mushroom powder, 
and pepper; mix until just combined and crumbly. 
Scrape down the sides of the bowl, and add the milk. 
Mix on low speed until the dough comes together; 
it should be quite stiff. 
96 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


2. Divide the dough into thirds. Wrap two pieces in 
plastic wrap; set aside. On a lightly floured work 
surface, roll out the third piece to 1/8 inch thick. Cut 
the dough with a   cookie or biscuit cutter. 
Arrange the crackers on a baking sheet, and prick 
each with a fork once or twice. Sprinkle with salt, and 
bake for 15 to 20 minutes or until they start to brown. 
3. Remove from the oven; let cool on a wire rack. 
Repeat with the remaining dough, rerolling the 
scraps once. Serve when cool, or store in an airtight 
container for up to 1 week. 
herbed cheese with pears, 
pine nuts, and honey 

SERVES 4 

Cheese drizzled with honey is a traditional 
Mediterranean appetizer; when mixed with fruit 
and nuts, it makes a tantalizing dessert. 

8 ounces part-skim ricotta cheese 
3 tablespoons pine nuts 


6 ounces fresh goat cheese, room 
temperature 


1 teaspoon fresh thyme leaves, finely 
chopped 


2 teaspoons fresh flat-leaf parsley, 
finely chopped 


1/2 teaspoon finely grated lemon zest 
2 ripe but firm Bartlett pears 


2 tablespoons plus 2 teaspoons flavorful 
honey, such as buckwheat, chestnut, or 
leatherwood 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Place the ricotta in a 
fine sieve set over a bowl; let the excess liquid drain, 
about 30 minutes. Meanwhile, spread the nuts in a 
single layer on a rimmed baking sheet. Toast in the 
oven until lightly browned, tossing occasionally, 
about 7 minutes. Transfer to a plate; let cool. 
2. In a food processor or medium bowl, mix together 
the goat cheese and drained ricotta until 
creamy and thoroughly combined. Stir in the thyme, 
parsley, and lemon zest; set aside. 
3. Slice each pear into 6 wedges. Divide the herbed 
cheese among 4 serving plates, spooning it into 
mounds. Arrange 3 pear wedges next to the cheese 
on each plate. Sprinkle with nuts; drizzle about 2 
teaspoons honey over each portion of cheese and 
pears. Serve immediately. 

FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 320 CALORIES, 17 G FAT, 

37 MG CHOLESTEROL, 28 G CARBOHYDRATE, 229 MG 

SODIUM, 16 G PROTEIN, 2 G FIBER 

vegetarian pate 

MAKES 3 CUPS 

5 large eggs 

1/4 pound string beans, ends trimmed, cut 
into   pieces 


1 tablespoon unsalted butter 
1 red onion


3/4 cup toasted walnuts 
1 tablespoon soy sauce 
2 tablespoons mayonnaise 
1 tablespoon olive oil 


2 tablespoons finely chopped chives 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


Bread or crackers, for serving 

1. Fill a large bowl with ice and water; set aside. 
Place the eggs in a medium saucepan with enough 
water to cover by 2 inches. Place over high heat; 
bring to a boil. Turn off heat; cover. Let stand for 
12 minutes. Transfer the eggs to the ice-water bath 
to stop cooking. When the eggs are cool, peel them 
under cold running water, cut into quarters, and set 
aside. Let the cooking water return to a boil; blanch 
the string beans for 2 to 3 minutes. Transfer to the 
ice-water bath to stop the cooking. 
2. Melt the butter in a medium saute pan over 
medium heat. Add the onion; cook until caramelized, 
8 to 10 minutes. Remove from heat; cool to 
room temperature. 
3. Combine the eggs, beans, walnuts, soy sauce, 
mayonnaise, and oil in the bowl of a food processor. 
Pulse until finely chopped but not pureed. Stir 
in the sauteed onion and chives; season with salt 
and pepper. Serve at room temperature with bread 
or crackers. 
STARTERS 97 


batter-fried stuffed 
squash blossoms 

SERVES 4 TO 6 

To stuff the squash blossoms easily, spoon the 
filling into a pastry bag fitted with a coupler; pipe 
it directly into each blossom. 

1 cup ricotta cheese 

1 cup all-purpose flour 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


1 cup plus 2 tablespoons milk 

3 ounces (about 1 cup) mozzarella cheese, 
cut into   cubes, room temperature 


1 tablespoon coarsely chopped fresh 
marjoram 


2 tablespoons coarsely chopped fresh 
flat-leaf parsley 


16 large (about 4 ounces) squash blossoms 
1 quart light olive oil 


1. Place the ricotta cheese in a double layer of 
cheesecloth. Tie up the ends, and hang over a bowl 
to drain. Place in the refrigerator for 2 to 3 hours, 
or overnight. 
2. In a medium bowl, whisk together the flour with 
salt and pepper to taste. Slowly whisk the milk into 
the flour to make a paste. Continue to add milk 
slowly, whisking constantly, until the batter is 
slightly thickened and has a very smooth consistency; 
set aside. 
3. Remove the ricotta from the cheesecloth, and discard 
the liquid. In another medium bowl, stir together 
the drained ricotta, mozzarella, marjoram, 
and parsley, and season with salt and pepper. Gently 
open the squash-blossom petals, and, using a 
small spoon or pastry bag, fill a blossom about two-
thirds full with the ricotta mixture. Wrap the petals 
around the mixture to seal. Using your fingers, gently 
press the blossom to evenly distribute the filling. 
Repeat, filling all the blossoms. 
4. In a small saucepan fitted with a deep-fry thermometer, 
heat the olive oil over medium-high heat 
to 375 degrees F. Place the stuffed blossoms in the reserved 
batter until completely coated. Lift out, and gently 
drag the blossom against the edge of the bowl to 
remove excess batter. Carefully slip as many blossoms 
into the hot oil as will comfortably fit without 
crowding. Fry the blossoms until golden brown, 2 to 
3 minutes. Remove from the oil with a slotted spoon, 
and transfer to several layers of paper towels to 
drain. Sprinkle with salt, and serve immediately. 
cucumber and smoked 
salmon "sandwiches" 

SERVES 8 TO 10 

1/4 pound smoked salmon, finely chopped 

2 tablespoons finely chopped red onion 
2 teaspoons finely chopped fresh cilantro 


1 jalapeno pepper, seeded and finely 
chopped 


Finely grated zest of 1 lime 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
1 English cucumber 


1/4 cup creme fraiche, well chilled 

1 lime, peeled and segmented, each 
segment cut into 4 pieces 


1. Make the tartare: In a small bowl, combine the 
salmon, onion, cilantro, jalapeno, and zest. Season 
with salt and pepper. 
2. Using a paring knife or vegetable peeler, remove 
the skin on two opposite sides of the cucumber. 
Trim the ends, and cut the cucumber crosswise into 
48  -thick slices. Place the slices on paper towels 
to dry. 
3. Using a butter knife or a small offset spatula, 
spread about 1/2 teaspoon creme fraiche on half of 
the cucumber slices, and then top with 1 teaspoon 
tartare. Place the remaining cucumber slices on top, 
followed by a small dollop of creme fraiche and a 
piece of lime. Serve immediately, or chill, covered 
with plastic wrap, up to 1 hour. 
98 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


lettuce bundles with 
spicy peanut noodles 

SERVES 6 TO 8 

This is a great dish to serve at an informal lunch 
or dinner party. Set out all the ingredients, and let 
your guests assemble their own bundles. Store-
bought roasted duck or chicken can be used; skip 
step 2. 

1/2 cup Spanish peanuts or other peanuts 

2 boneless whole duck or chicken breasts 
1/2 cup plus 3 tablespoons soy sauce 


Canola oil 
1 large garlic clove 


1   piece ginger, peeled and 
cut in half 


21/4 teaspoons chile paste 

1/4 cup plus 3 tablespoons smooth, 
good-quality peanut butter 


3 tablespoons sugar 
1/4 cup plus 11/2 teaspoons peanut oil 


Juice of 1 lime 
41/2 tablespoons water, or more if needed 

Coarse salt 

6 ounces vermicelli or capellini (angel hair) 
noodles 

2 ounces garlic chives or scallions, cut 
into 4-inch lengths 


1 Japanese or Kirby cucumber, thinly sliced 

2 heads Boston or other butterhead lettuce, 
leaves separated 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Place the peanuts in 
a single layer on a rimmed baking sheet; toast until 
they are golden and aromatic, 5 to 8 minutes. Shake 
the pan halfway through to ensure the nuts toast 
evenly. When cool enough to handle, roughly chop 
the nuts; set aside. 
2. Place the duck or chicken breasts in a resealable 
plastic bag with 1/2 cup of the soy sauce, and let marinate 
for 1 hour. Heat a lightly oiled grill or cast-iron 
skillet over medium-high heat until very hot. Grill 
the duck or chicken breasts until cooked through, 5 
to 7 minutes per side for duck and 4 to 6 minutes per 
side for chicken. Let cool slightly, and shred with your 
fingers, or cut into  -wide strips with a knife. 
3. In a food processor, pulse the garlic and ginger 
until finely chopped. Add the remaining 3 tablespoons 
soy sauce, the chile paste, peanut butter, 
sugar, peanut oil, lime juice, and water, and pulse 
until smooth. (For a thinner sauce, add 1 or 2 more 
teaspoons water; pulse to combine.) Set aside. 
4. Bring a large pot of water to a boil. Salt the water, 
add the noodles, and cook until al dente, about 8 
minutes. Drain in a colander, and rinse with cold 
water to stop the cooking. 
5. Dress the noodles with 1/2 cup of the peanut sauce, 
and transfer to a medium serving bowl. If desired, 
set the bowl into a larger bowl filled with ice to keep 
the noodles chilled at the table. Arrange the reserved 
peanuts, remaining sauce, chives, cucumber, 
and lettuce in serving dishes on the table. 
Guests can assemble their own rolls by wrapping 
noodles, a little sauce, and their choice of meat and 
fillings in a lettuce leaf. 
STARTERS 99 


herb-marinated cheese 

SERVES 4 

Serve this quick appetizer with a hearty 
brown bread. 

8 ounces Bucheron or other ripened goat'smilk 
cheese 


1/2 small red onion, thinly sliced into 
half-moons 


1 teaspoon fresh thyme 
1 teaspoon fresh oregano 


Pinch of crushed red pepper flakes 
1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil 


1 tablespoon red-wine vinegar 

Coarse salt and freshly ground black 
pepper 
Sliced whole-grain bread 

1. Cut the cheese crosswise into   slices, and 
arrange the slices on a serving platter. 
2. Sprinkle the cheese slices with onion, herbs, and 
red pepper flakes. Drizzle with the olive oil and 
vinegar. Season with salt and pepper. 
3. Let sit at room temperature for about 30 minutes. 
Serve with sliced bread. 
roasted cauliflower 
and manchego hand pies 


MAKES 8 

1 small head cauliflower, florets separated 
and thinly sliced (about 4 cups) 


7 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


2/3 cup hazelnuts, toasted, skins removed 
1 garlic clove 


1 teaspoon finely grated lemon zest 
2 teaspoons finely chopped fresh rosemary 


All-purpose flour, for work surface 

Cheese Short Crust, made with Manchego 
cheese (page 216) 

5 ounces Manchego cheese, thinly sliced 
1 tablespoon heavy cream 


1 large egg yolk 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Toss the cauliflower 
with 3 tablespoons of the oil in a medium bowl; season 
with salt and pepper. Spread on a rimmed 
baking sheet. Roast until golden brown, about 
7 minutes. Flip the cauliflower; roast 5 minutes 
more. Let cool. 
2. Put the nuts and garlic in a food processor. With 
the machine running, slowly add the remaining 4 
tablespoons oil until the mixture is finely chopped. 
Add the lemon zest and 1 teaspoon of the rosemary; 
season with salt and pepper. Process until combined. 
3. Roll out half of the dough on a lightly floured surface 
to a   thickness. Cut out 8 4-inch rounds. 
Transfer to a rimmed baking sheet lined with parchment. 
Spread 2 teaspoons hazelnut mixture onto 
each round, leaving a   border. Divide the cauliflower 
among the rounds. Top with cheese and the 
remaining teaspoon rosemary, dividing evenly; 
sprinkle with pepper. Whisk the cream and egg yolk 
in a small bowl. Brush the edges of the dough with 
egg wash. Set aside. 
4. Roll out the remaining dough on a lightly floured 
surface to a   thickness. Cut out 8 4-inch 
rounds. Cut out 8 flowers from scraps with a small 
flower-shaped cookie cutter. Place a dough round 
on top of each pie; gently press the edges with a 
fork to seal. Brush the crusts with egg wash; place 
a flower on each pie. Brush the flowers with egg 
wash. Refrigerate until cold, about 20 minutes. Bake 
until the crust is golden brown, 30 to 32 minutes. 
Serve warm or at room temperature. 
100 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


almond-crusted curry chicken 
salad tea sandwiches 

MAKES 2 DOZEN 

1 cup sliced blanched almonds 

1 whole skinless and boneless chicken 
breast (about 10 ounces) 


1 teaspoon coarse salt 

1 small onion, unpeeled and quartered 
4 whole black peppercorns 
5 cups water 


11/2 cups mayonnaise 
2 teaspoons curry powder 

2 tablespoons mango chutney 

3/4 teaspoon white-wine vinegar 
3 tablespoons unsweetened shredded 
coconut, toasted 


1/2 cup (1 stick) unsalted butter, room 
temperature 


24 thin slices white bread 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Spread the almonds 
on a baking sheet, and toast until fragrant and 
golden, 5 to 7 minutes. Transfer to a bowl to cool, 
and gently crush. Set aside. 
2. In a medium saucepan, combine the chicken, salt, 
onion, peppercorns, and water. Bring to a boil over 
medium-high heat; reduce heat, and simmer until 
the chicken is cooked through, about 20 minutes. 
Transfer the chicken to a plate to cool; reserve the 
stock for another use. 
3. When the chicken is cool enough to handle, shred 
the meat and chop it into small pieces. Return to 
the plate; cover, and place in refrigerator until ready 
to use. 
4. In a small bowl, combine the mayonnaise, curry 
powder, chutney, vinegar, and toasted coconut; stir 
to combine. Reserve 1/2 cup curry mayonnaise, and 
stir the remaining mayonnaise into the chicken. 
Thinly spread butter on 2 slices bread; cover 1 slice 
with a thin layer of chicken salad, and top with the 
other bread slice. Set aside. Repeat with the remaining 
ingredients. 
5. Stack several sandwiches; use a serrated knife to 
trim the crusts and cut into 2 rectangles. Arrange 
the sandwiches in a single row on the serving tray; 
they should rest on one long edge with the short 
ends standing upright. Spread a dab of reserved 
curry mayonnaise on the short ends, and gently pat 
on the almonds. Serve immediately. (Do not cover 
with damp paper towels, or the almonds will become 
soft.) 
bacon and egg salad 
tea sandwiches 

MAKES 3 DOZEN 

6 large hard-boiled eggs, peeled and 
finely chopped 
1/2 cup mayonnaise 


21/2 teaspoons Dijon mustard 
1/4 teaspoon cayenne pepper 

6 slices bacon (about 5 ounces), cooked 
and coarsely chopped 


1/2 teaspoon hot pepper sauce, such 
as Tabasco 


Coarse salt and freshly ground 

black pepper 

5 tablespoons unsalted butter, room 
temperature 


18 thin slices white bread 

1/4 cup finely chopped chives 

1. Place the chopped eggs in a medium bowl. Add 
the mayonnaise, mustard, cayenne, and bacon; stir 
to combine. Add the hot pepper sauce, and season 
with salt and pepper. 
2. Thinly spread butter on 2 slices of bread; cover 
1 slice with egg salad, and top with the other slice. 
Use a serrated knife to trim the crusts and cut into 
4 squares. Dip one edge of each square in the 
chopped chives. Repeat with the remaining ingredients. 
Cover the sandwiches with damp paper towels 
until ready to serve. 
STARTERS 101 









mozzarella, prosciutto, 
and pesto butter tea sandwiches 

MAKES 2 DOZEN 

To make perfectly round sandwiches, cut each of 
the layers separately with the same biscuit cutter. 
Ask your butcher to slice the prosciutto more 
thickly than usual so it can be cut easily without 
tearing; you will need 1 round for each sandwich. 

6 tablespoons (3/4 stick) unsalted butter, 
room temperature 


3/4 cup fresh basil, packed (about 2 ounces), 
rinsed well, and dried 
1/2 garlic clove 
3 tablespoons finely grated Parmesan 
cheese 
1 tablespoon pine nuts 


8 ounces sliced prosciutto 
1 pound fresh mozzarella cheese 


2 loaves rustic bread (about 2 pounds), 
cut into 48   slices 


1. Make the pesto butter: Combine the butter, basil, 
garlic, Parmesan, and pine nuts in the bowl of a food 
processor fitted with the metal blade; process until 
blended. Set aside. Lay the prosciutto slices flat on 
a piece of plastic wrap, and cover with another 
piece. Place in freezer 10 minutes. 
2. Remove the prosciutto from the freezer; use a 21/4inch 
round cutter to cut into rounds. Slice the mozzarella 
1/8 inch thick, and cut into rounds. Cut the 
bread using the same cutter, being sure to remove 
all the crust. 
3. Spread a thin layer of pesto butter on 2 bread 
rounds. Layer 1 round with a round each of mozzarella 
and prosciutto; top with the other bread 
round. Repeat with the remaining ingredients. 
Cover with damp paper towels until ready to serve. 
roquefort butter and 
red pear tea sandwiches 

MAKES 2 DOZEN 

The red skins of the pears are a colorful accent to 
these simple tea sandwiches. Use the Roquefort 
butter in other combinations, such as with watercress 
or thinly sliced tomato. 

Juice of 1 lemon 

2 tablespoons water 
1 red pear, cored and very thinly sliced 


4 ounces Roquefort cheese, crumbled 
1/2 cup (1 stick) unsalted butter, room 
temperature 
1/8 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 


16 thin slices white bread or brioche 

1. Combine the lemon juice and the water in a small 
bowl; immerse the sliced pears until ready to use 
to prevent discoloration. Blot dry with paper towels 
before using. 
2. In a medium bowl, gently stir the Roquefort into 
the butter, leaving small bits of cheese. Be careful 
not to overmix, or the butter will turn blue. Add the 
pepper. 
3. Spread a thin layer of Roquefort butter on 2 slices 
of bread. Line 1 slice with pears, overlapping 
slightly, and top with the other bread slice. Use a 
serrated knife to trim the crusts and cut into 3 rectangles 
(about 1 x 3 inches). Repeat with the remaining 
ingredients. Cover with damp paper towels 
until ready to serve. 
102 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


smoked duck and chutney 
butter tea sandwiches 

MAKES 2 DOZEN 

1 cup (2 sticks) unsalted butter, room 
temperature 


6 tablespoons peach or apricot chutney 
24 thin slices black or pumpernickel bread 


1 pound smoked duck breasts, trimmed of 
fat, very thinly sliced 


1 bunch watercress, cleaned and trimmed 

1. In the bowl of a food processor fitted with the 
plastic blade, combine the butter and chutney; pulse 
until well combined. 
2. Thinly spread chutney butter on 2 bread slices. 
Cover 1 slice with thin layers of duck and watercress; 
top with the other bread slice. Use a serrated 
knife to trim the crusts and cut into 2 triangles. Repeat 
with the remaining ingredients. Cover with 
damp paper towels until ready to serve. 





stuffed marinated 
hot red cherry peppers 


MAKES 14; SERVES 7 AS A FIRST COURSE 

14 hot red cherry peppers, cored and seeded, 
tops reserved 


4 ounces young pecorino or provolone 
cheese, cut into   cubes 


14 small sprigs fresh marjoram 
1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil 


2 tablespoons red-wine vinegar 
1 garlic clove, minced 


2 teaspoons coarse salt 
1/4 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper 


Crusty bread, for serving 

1. Stuff each pepper with cheese and a sprig of marjoram. 
Transfer the stuffed peppers and pepper tops 
to a glass loaf pan. 
2. Whisk the oil, vinegar, garlic, salt, and pepper 
in a small bowl. Pour over the peppers. Let marinate 
at room temperature 1 hour. 
3. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Place the tops on the 
peppers. Cook until the cheese has melted and the 
peppers are tender, 12 to 15 minutes. Let cool 
slightly. Serve with bread. 









dijon baby lamb chops 

SERVES 6 TO 8 

1/2 cup Dijon mustard 

3 tablespoons packed light-brown sugar 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


2 racks baby lamb chops (8 ribs and about 
11/4 pounds each), frenched 


Mint sprigs, for garnish 

Red Currant-Mint Dipping Sauce 
(recipe follows) 


1. Stir the mustard, brown sugar, 1/2 teaspoon salt, 
and 1/4 teaspoon pepper in a bowl. Brush the mixture 
all over the lamb. Transfer to a large resealable 
plastic bag; refrigerate for at least 6 hours (up to 
overnight). 
2. Preheat the oven to 450 degrees  F. Bring the lamb to 
room temperature. Transfer to a rimmed baking 
sheet. Roast until golden brown and an instant-read 
thermometer inserted into the thickest part registers 
125 degrees  to 130 degrees F, 15 to 20 minutes. Remove from 
the oven, and tent with foil. Let rest 10 minutes. Just 
before serving, cut the lamb racks into individual 
chops. Garnish with mint sprigs. Serve with dipping 
sauce. 
red currant-mint dipping sauce 

MAKES ABOUT 11/2 CUPS 

11/2 cups red currant jelly 
1 tablespoon red-wine vinegar 

1 cup coarsely chopped mint leaves 

Whisk the jelly, vinegar, and 1 tablespoon water in 
a medium bowl until smooth. Fold in the mint. The 
sauce can be refrigerated in an airtight container 
up to 6 hours. 

STARTERS 103 


easy pea ravioli with mint 

SERVES 4 AS A FIRST COURSE 

3 tablespoons olive oil 
1 shallot, finely chopped (about 1/4 cup) 
1 garlic clove, minced 


21/4 cups shelled fresh or thawed frozen peas 
1/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons dry white wine 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
40 wonton wrappers (31/2 inches each) 
1 large egg, lightly beaten 
1/4 cup (1/2 stick) unsalted butter 
4 fresh mint leaves, thinly sliced 

1. Heat the oil in a medium skillet over medium 
heat. Add the shallot; cook, stirring occasionally, 
until translucent, 3 to 4 minutes. Add the garlic; 
cook until soft, 2 to 3 minutes. Add the peas, wine, 
1 cup water, and 11/2 teaspoons salt; season with pepper. 
Simmer until the liquid has almost evaporated 
and the peas are tender, 12 to 15 minutes. Let cool 
slightly. 
2. Puree the pea mixture in a food processor. Brush 
the edges of 10 wrappers with egg. Place 1 tablespoon 
puree in centers. Top with a dry wrapper; seal 
edges. Trim using a   round cutter. Repeat with 
the remaining wrappers and puree. 
3. Working in batches, cook the ravioli in salted 
simmering water until they are soft and rise to the 
surface, about 2 minutes. Meanwhile, melt the butter 
in a medium skillet over medium heat; add the 
ravioli to the skillet, and cook until the butter is 
frothy and the ravioli is coated, 2 to 3 minutes. 
Sprinkle with mint. Serve immediately. 
radishes with herbed 
ricotta dip, sweet butter, 
and fleur de sel 

SERVES 12 

We used a combination of French breakfast, 
white icicle, and pink beauty radishes, but you 
can use any variety you'd like. When the weather 
is hot, sprinkle radishes with crushed ice before 
serving to keep them crisp. 

1 pound low-fat fresh ricotta cheese 

2 tablespoons finely chopped fresh 
flat-leaf parsley 


1 tablespoon finely chopped fresh dill 
1 tablespoon finely chopped fresh basil 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
4 bunches radishes, trimmed if desired 


1/4 cup (1/2 stick) sweet unsalted butter, 
softened, for serving 


Fleur de sel, for serving 

1. Make the dip: Stir the ricotta, parsley, dill, and 
basil in a medium bowl. Season with salt and pepper. 
The dip can be refrigerated in an airtight container 
up to 2 days. 
2. Serve the radishes with bowls of dip, butter, and 
fleur de sel. 








fried anchovies and sage 

SERVES 6 

Whole milk, for soaking 

18 best-quality anchovy fillets 

36 small to medium sage 
leaves 


1 to 2 tablespoons instant flour (such as 
Wondra) 


1 large egg, lightly beaten 

Extra-virgin olive oil, for frying 

1. Put the milk into a shallow dish. Add the anchovy 
fillets; soak 10 minutes. Drain on paper towels, and 
pat dry. Cut the fillets to be the same length as the 
104 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


sage leaves. Lay each sage leaf face up on a large 
cutting board. Place an anchovy fillet on half of the 
sage leaves; crush with fork tines, being careful not 
to tear leaves. Sandwich with another leaf, face 
down. Press with the back of a spoon to seal. 

2. Preheat the oven to 200 degrees F. Put the flour into a 
bowl and the egg into another. Heat 1/4 inch oil in a 
medium skillet over medium-high heat. Coat 6 of 
the anchovy-sage sandwiches with flour, shaking 
off any excess, then with egg, allowing excess to 
drip off. Fry, turning once, until golden, 45 seconds 
to 1 minute per side. Drain on paper towels. Transfer 
to the oven to keep warm. Repeat with the remaining 
anchovies. Serve immediately. 













whole-grain bread with 
cheese and candied shallots 

SERVES 8 

3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

1 pound shallots, thinly sliced 
Coarse salt 


1 tablespoon pure maple syrup 
1/2 teaspoon balsamic vinegar 


Freshly ground pepper 

Soft, mild cheese, such as farmer cheese 
or goat cheese, for serving 
Sliced whole-grain bread, for serving 

Thyme leaves, for garnish 

1. Heat the oil in a medium skillet over medium-
high heat. Add the shallots and a pinch of salt. Cook, 
stirring often, until the shallots have softened and 
browned, about 20 minutes. 
2. Reduce the heat to medium-low, and stir in the 
maple syrup and vinegar. Cook 2 minutes, then season 
with salt and pepper. Candied shallots can be 
refrigerated in an airtight container up to 1 week; 
bring to room temperature before serving. To serve, 
spread cheese onto bread slices; top with the candied 
shallots, and garnish with thyme leaves. 
croquettes with serrano ham 
and manchego cheese 

SERVES 8 TO 12 AS A TAPA; 

MAKES ABOUT 16 

2 tablespoons unsalted butter 

2 tablespoons olive oil 

1/4 cup finely chopped onion 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

7 tablespoons all-purpose flour, 
plus more for shaping 


3/4 cup whole milk 
6 tablespoons finely chopped serrano ham 

1/3 cup plus 1/4 cup grated Manchego cheese
(about 13/4 ounces) 
3 large eggs 


11/2 cups fresh bread crumbs 
Vegetable oil, for frying 
Fresh flat-leaf parsley sprigs, for garnish 

1. Heat the butter and oil in a medium saucepan 
over medium heat until the butter has melted. Add 
the onion; season with salt and pepper. Cook, stirring 
occasionally, until the onion is translucent, 
about 3 minutes. Add the flour; cook, stirring, 1 
minute. Whisk in the milk, and cook, whisking, 3 
minutes. Whisk in the ham and 1/3 cup cheese. Season 
with salt and pepper as desired. Spread the mixture 
onto a baking sheet, and let cool completely. 
The mixture can be refrigerated in an airtight container 
up to 2 days. 
2. Whisk together the eggs in a shallow dish. Stir 
together the bread crumbs and remaining 1/4 cup 
cheese in another shallow dish. Scoop tablespoons 
of the cooled mixture, and shape with floured hands 
into   ovals. Working with 1 oval at a time, coat 
in the beaten egg, then in the bread crumb mixture. 
Transfer to a parchment-lined baking sheet. 
STARTERS 105 


3. Heat 21/2 inches oil in a large, heavy stockpot until 
it registers 375 degrees F on a deep-fry thermometer. Working 
in batches to avoid crowding, fry the croquettes, 
flipping once, until dark golden brown, 1 to 2 minutes 
total. Using a slotted spoon, transfer to paper 
towels to drain. (Adjust the heat between batches 
as needed to keep oil at a steady temperature.) 
Serve warm, garnished with parsley sprigs. 
fried herbed almonds 

MAKES 2 CUPS 

These crunchy thyme-flecked nuts are delicious 
served with sherry and slices of Manchego 
cheese. 

3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

2 cups whole blanched almonds 

2 tablespoons fresh thyme leaves 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1. Heat the oil in a large skillet over medium heat. 
Add the almonds, and cook, stirring occasionally, 
until lightly golden and fragrant, 10 to 12 minutes. 
2. Stir in the thyme leaves. Remove from the heat. 
Season with salt and pepper. Spread out on a 
rimmed baking sheet, and let cool completely. The 
almonds can be stored in an airtight container at 
room temperature up to 2 weeks. 
tamari and 
maple roasted almonds 


MAKES 2 CUPS 

These tangy glazed nuts go perfectly with a glass 
of sherry. 

10 ounces whole shelled almonds (2 cups) 

1/4 cup reduced-sodium tamari 
3 tablespoons pure maple syrup 


Nonstick cooking spray 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Spread the almonds in 
a single layer on a rimmed baking sheet, and bake 
until lightly toasted and fragrant, 7 to 8 minutes. 
2. In a medium bowl, combine the tamari and maple 
syrup. Add the almonds, and toss until thoroughly 
coated. Lightly cover the baking sheet with cooking 
spray, and spread the almonds evenly on the sheet. 
3. Roast in the oven until deep brown, stirring once, 
15 to 17 minutes. Immediately transfer to a clean 
baking sheet and spread out the almonds, separating 
them so the nuts don't touch. Let cool before 
serving. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 306 CALORIES, 24 G 

FAT, 0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 17 G CARBOHYDRATE, 401 MG 

SODIUM, 11 G PROTEIN, 6 G FIBER 

smoky cashews 

MAKES 2 CUPS 

2 cups unsalted cashews (about 9 ounces) 

2 tablespoons finely chopped fresh 
rosemary 


1 teaspoon smoked hot paprika 
2 tablespoons light brown sugar 


2 teaspoons coarse salt 
1 tablespoon unsalted butter, melted 


Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Spread the cashews in 
a single layer on a rimmed baking sheet. Toast in 
the oven, stirring once or twice, until golden, 10 to 
12 minutes. Toss with the remaining ingredients. 
Serve warm or at room temperature. 

106 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


soups 


AND 

stews 



beef shin and carrot stew 

SERVES 6 

6 beef shins (10 to 12 ounces each) 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

All-purpose flour, for dredging 

3 sprigs fresh parsley 

3 sprigs fresh thyme 

7 whole allspice 
10 whole black peppercorns 


1/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons extra-virgin 
olive oil 


4 leeks, white and pale-green parts only, 
coarsely chopped and rinsed well 


3 celery stalks, cut into   cubes 

4 garlic cloves, crushed 

1 can (14.9 ounces) stout, such as Guinness 
11/2 cups homemade or low-sodium 
store-bought beef stock 
1 strip (2 inches long) orange zest 

11/2 pounds small boiling potatoes, peeled, 
if desired 

1 pound Thumbelina carrots, scrubbed 
(or other carrots, peeled and cut into 
1  pieces) 


Coarsely chopped fresh curly-leaf parsley, 
for garnish 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Generously season the 
beef with salt and pepper. Dredge the beef in the 
flour; shake off excess. 
2. Wrap the parsley, thyme, allspice, and peppercorns 
in cheesecloth, and tie with kitchen twine to 
form a bouquet garni. 
3. Heat 3 tablespoons of the oil in a Dutch oven or 
large ovenproof saucepan over medium-high heat. 
Working in batches, brown the beef, 3 to 4 minutes 
per side, adding more oil (up to 2 tablespoons) as 
needed. Transfer the beef to a bowl. 
4. Add 1 tablespoon oil to the fat in the pot. Stir in 
the leeks, celery, and garlic; cook, stirring occasionally, 
until softened, about 7 minutes. Add the 
stout; cook, scraping up the browned bits from the 
bottom of the pot. 
5. Return the beef to the pot. Add the stock, bouquet 
garni, zest, and enough water to cover. Season 
with salt and pepper. Bring to a boil over medium-
high heat. Cover the pot; transfer it to the oven. 
Braise the beef 2 hours. 
6. Add the potatoes and carrots. Cover the pot; 
braise 1 hour more. Discard the bouquet garni. Garnish 
the stew with parsley. 
curried apple soup 

SERVES 4 

1 tablespoon unsalted butter 

2 shallots, minced 
2 teaspoons freshly grated ginger 


11/2 tablespoons curry powder 

2 Granny Smith apples, peeled, cored, 
and cut into   pieces 


1 small russet potato, peeled and cut into 
  pieces 


1 teaspoon coarse salt, plus more 
for seasoning 


33/4 cups homemade or low-sodium canned 
chicken stock 

1/2 cup heavy cream or milk 

Freshly ground pepper 
Sour cream, for garnish 


1. Melt the butter in a medium saucepan over 
medium heat. Add the shallots; cook until soft and 
translucent, about 2 minutes. Add the ginger and 
curry powder; cook, stirring, 1 minute. Add the apples, 
potato, salt, and chicken stock. Bring to a simmer 
over medium-high heat, and cook until the potato 
is tender when pierced with a paring knife, about 12 
minutes. Remove from heat, and let cool slightly. 
2. Use an immersion blender, or transfer mixture 
to the jar of a blender, working in batches if necessary 
so as not to fill more than halfway; puree just 
until smooth (do not overprocess). Return the soup 
to the pan; stir in the cream, and season with salt 
and pepper. Place over medium heat until just 
heated through; do not let the soup boil. Divide 
among serving bowls, and garnish with sour cream. 
108 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


elwood's ham chowder 

MAKES ABOUT 5 QUARTS 

This recipe is courtesy of Donald Barickman; it 
was created with and named for his father, Elwood. 

1 tablespoon vegetable oil 

1 pound Virginia ham, cut into   
pieces 


2 large onions, cut into   pieces 
(about 3 cups) 


4 garlic cloves, thinly sliced 

2 bunches collard greens (about 1 pound), 
stems discarded, washed, and roughly 
chopped 


1 28-ounce can whole tomatoes with juice, 
roughly chopped 


7 cups homemade or low-sodium 
canned chicken stock 


2 cups homemade or low-sodium canned 
beef stock 


8 medium red potatoes, cut into   
cubes (about 6 cups) 


11/2 tablespoons chopped fresh thyme leaves 

11/2 tablespoons chopped fresh flat-leaf 
parsley 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

Hot pepper sauce, such as Tabasco 

(optional) 

1. Heat the oil in a large stockpot over medium-low 
heat. Add the ham, and cook until it starts to release 
juices, about 2 minutes; do not brown. Add the 
onions and garlic; cook, stirring occasionally, until 
soft, about 10 minutes. 
2. Working in batches, if necessary, so as not to 
overcrowd the pot, cook the collard greens, tossing 
frequently with tongs, until thoroughly wilted. Add 
the tomatoes and juice, chicken and beef stocks, 
potatoes, thyme, and parsley. Bring to a boil, and 
reduce heat to a gentle simmer; cook, stirring and 
skimming any foam from the surface occasionally, 
until the potatoes are easily pierced with a paring 
knife, 30 to 40 minutes. Remove from heat; season 
with salt, black pepper, and hot pepper sauce, as desired. 
Serve hot. 
miso soup with 
tofu, spinach, and carrots 


SERVES 4 

Be sure to purchase firm or extra-firm tofu for this 
soup, as it will hold up better in hot liquid than 
softer varieties. Because the flavor and healthful 
qualities of miso are affected when boiled or with 
prolonged exposure to high temperatures, it 
should be added only at the end of cooking. 
Whisk it with a bit of liquid first so it is quickly 
and evenly distributed. We used white miso, 
which is lower in sodium, but you can use darker 
types for a stronger, more pronounced flavor. 

3 cups homemade or low-sodium canned 
vegetable or chicken stock, skimmed of fat 

2 cups water 

2 carrots, cut into matchsticks (about 1 cup) 

1/3 pound spinach, stems removed, 
cut into   strips 


6 ounces extra-firm tofu, cut into   
cubes 


2 tablespoons white miso 

1 scallion, sliced crosswise into   strips 

1. In a medium saucepan, bring the stock and the 
water to a boil over high heat. Reduce heat to 
medium-low, and add the carrots. Cook until the 
carrots are crisp-tender, about 2 minutes. 
2. Add the spinach and tofu, and stir to combine. 
Continue cooking just until the spinach is wilted 
and the tofu is heated through, about 1 minute more. 
3. Meanwhile, place the miso in a small bowl, and 
stir in 1/4 cup cooking liquid until the miso is dissolved. 
Add the mixture to the saucepan, stirring 
to combine. Do not let the soup boil once miso has 
been added. 
4. Remove from heat. Ladle the soup into 4 serving 
bowls. Sprinkle with scallions. Serve immediately. 
SOUPS AND STEWS 109 


garden and snap pea soup 
with vidalia onions 

SERVES 8 

We like this soup best when served hot, but it is 
also delightfully refreshing well chilled. 

2 tablespoons unsalted butter 

2 medium Vidalia or other sweet onions, 
roughly chopped 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

6 cups homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock, plus more for 
thinning 


11/4 pounds sugar snap peas, ends trimmed 
and string removed (about 11/4 cups) 

13/4 pounds garden peas, shelled (13/4 cups) 
1/2 cup heavy cream 

1. Prepare an ice-water bath, and set aside. Melt the 
butter in a medium saucepan over medium-low 
heat. Add the onions, and season with salt and pepper. 
Cook, stirring frequently, until the onions are 
translucent, about 8 minutes. 
2. Add the stock; bring to a boil. Reserve about 1/4 
cup each snap and garden peas. Add the remaining 
snap peas to the saucepan, and return the stock 
to a boil. Add the remaining garden peas; cook until 
all the peas are tender, about 4 minutes. Transfer 
the pan to the ice-water bath. Stir until the mixture 
is cool. 
3. Working in batches, transfer the mixture to the 
jar of a blender; process until it is smooth. Return 
to the saucepan, and set over medium heat. Stir in 
the cream, and adjust the consistency with more 
stock, if needed. Season with salt and pepper. 
4. Meanwhile, prepare a small ice-water bath, and 
bring a small saucepan of water to a boil. Add the 
reserved snap peas and garden peas. Blanch until 
they are just tender, 2 to 3 minutes. Using a slotted 
spoon, transfer the peas to the ice-water bath; drain 
in a colander. Cut the snap peas into small pieces. 
5. To serve, divide the soup among soup bowls, and 
garnish each serving with blanched mixed peas. 
chilled fennel and leek soup 

MAKES 41/2 QUARTS 

This soup must be served very cold, so for best 
results, prepare it a day ahead and let it chill 
overnight in the refrigerator. 

6 medium leeks (about 11/4 pounds), white 
and light green parts only, thinly sliced 


1/2 cup (1 stick) unsalted butter 

1 large yellow onion, diced 
1 teaspoon fennel seeds 


1/2 teaspoon coarse salt, plus more for 
seasoning 


1/8 teaspoon freshly ground pepper, plus 
more for seasoning 


2 garlic cloves, minced 

3 medium fennel bulbs (about 2 pounds), 
trimmed and roughly chopped 


8 cups homemade or low-sodium canned 
chicken stock 


4 cups cold water 
2 tablespoons Pernod (optional) 


Chervil sprigs, for garnish 

1. Place the leeks in a large bowl of cold water; stir, 
and let stand 5 minutes to let dirt and sand settle 
to the bottom. You may need to repeat this several 
times, changing the water each time. Once they are 
clean, let drain on paper towels. 
2. Melt the butter in a large saucepan over medium-
low heat. Add the onion and fennel seeds along with 
the salt and pepper. Cook, stirring occasionally, 
until the onion is softened and translucent, about 
10 minutes. Add the garlic; cook until fragrant but 
not brown, about 2 minutes. 
3. Add the leeks and fennel to the pan, and cook 
until the vegetables are tender, about 10 minutes. 
Add the chicken stock and the water, and bring to 
a boil; reduce heat, and simmer 20 minutes more. 
4. Remove from heat, and let cool slightly. Working 
in several batches, transfer the soup to the jar of a 
blender, being careful not to fill more than halfway 
and to cover the lid with a kitchen towel, as hot liquid 
expands when blended. Puree until smooth. 
110 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


Transfer to an airtight container, and place in refrigerator 
to chill completely, at least 4 hours 
or overnight. 

5. To serve, stir in the Pernod, if using, and season 
with salt and pepper. Ladle into soup bowls, and 
garnish with chervil. 
mexican fiesta soup 
with roasted tomatillo and 
cilantro pesto 


SERVES 4 

Cilantro's pungent fragrance partners well with 
fruity tomatillos in a lively pesto. The mixture offsets 
the spiciness of the cumin and jalapeno in 
this delectable soup. 

4 tomatillos, peeled and rinsed 
2/3 cup fresh cilantro leaves, packed, rinsed 
well 
2 garlic cloves, minced 


2 tablespoons freshly squeezed lime juice 
1 small white onion, diced 


1 jalapeno pepper, diced, plus more sliced 
for garnish (optional) 


1/2 teaspoon ground cumin 

1 28-ounce can whole peeled tomatoes 
(about 8 tomatoes), drained and crushed 

3 ears corn, quartered 

4 cups homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock, skimmed of fat 


Freshly ground pepper 

1/2 ripe avocado, pitted, cut into  -thick 
slices 


Nonstick cooking spray 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees  F. Place the tomatillos 
on a small rimmed baking sheet. Roast in the oven, 
turning once midway through, until they are softened 
and slightly charred, about 25 minutes. Remove 
from the oven, and let cool slightly. Transfer 
to the bowl of a food processor; add the cilantro, 
1 garlic clove, and lime juice. Process until smooth 
and combined; set aside. 
2. Lightly coat the bottom of a large nonstick 
saucepan with cooking spray. Add the onion, 
remaining garlic clove, and diced jalapeno; cook, 
stirring occasionally, over medium heat until the 
onion is softened, about 7 minutes. Add the cumin, 
tomatoes, corn, and chicken stock. Bring the liquid 
to a boil; reduce heat, and simmer until the vegetables 
are tender, 12 to 15 minutes. 

3. Remove from heat; stir in 3 tablespoons reserved 
tomatillo mixture, and season with pepper. Add the 
sliced avocado. Ladle into serving bowls; garnish 
with jalapeno slices, if desired. Serve with the remaining 
tomatillo pesto. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 230 CALORIES, 6 G FAT, 

3 MG CHOLESTEROL, 41 G CARBOHYDRATE, 717 MG SODIUM, 

9 G PROTEIN, 7 G FIBER 

pea bisque with 
shrimp and tarragon 


SERVES 6 

1/2 pound green split peas, picked over 
and rinsed 


2 8-ounce bottles clam juice 
6 cups water 


1 medium onion, chopped 
1 10-ounce box frozen baby peas, thawed 


1 pound medium shrimp, peeled and halved 
lengthwise 


3 garlic cloves, minced 
11/2 tablespoons lemon zest, finely grated 

1 teaspoon hot paprika 
1/4 teaspoon coarse salt 


1 tablespoon unsalted butter 
1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice 


1 tablespoon fresh tarragon, finely chopped 

1. Place the split peas in a large bowl with enough 
water to cover by 2 inches; let stand for 6 hours or 
overnight. 
2. Drain the split peas, and transfer them to a large 
stockpot. Add the clam juice, water, and onion; 
bring to a boil, reduce heat, and simmer, stirring occasionally, 
until the peas soften, 35 to 40 minutes. 
3. Stir in the baby peas, and simmer for 5 minutes. 
Let the soup cool slightly. Place in the bowl of a food 
processor, working in batches, if necessary; puree 
SOUPS AND STEWS 111 


until smooth. Press through a fine sieve into a large 
saucepan, and keep warm over low heat. 

4. In a large bowl, stir together the shrimp, garlic, 
lemon zest, paprika, and salt. Melt the butter in a 
nonstick medium skillet over medium-high heat. 
Add the shrimp, and cook, stirring, until they begin 
to turn pink and opaque. Add the lemon juice, and 
stir for 1 minute more. Remove from heat, and stir 
in the tarragon. 
5. Ladle the bisque into 6 shallow soup plates, and 
place a mound of shrimp in the center of each. 
chili con carne 

SERVES 12 

You can control the heat of this chili by increasing 
or decreasing the number of chiles; be sure to 
have good ventilation over the stove when pan-
roasting them. If you have two large cast-iron 
skillets, save time by using both at once. If you 
like, serve the chili with other traditional garnishes, 
such as shredded Cheddar and Monterey 
Jack cheese, sour cream, and chopped cilantro. 

1 pound dried pinto beans, soaked 
according to package directions 


1/4 cup plus 3 tablespoons corn oil 
31/2 pounds plum tomatoes (about 18) 

21/2 pounds medium yellow onions (about 7), 
stem ends trimmed, quartered lengthwise 
with skins left on 

10 garlic cloves (skins left on) 

4 mulato chiles 

3 ancho chiles 

1 141/2-ounce can low-sodium beef broth 

1 cup water 

5 pounds ground round or ground chuck 

1 tablespoon coarse salt 

2 ounces Mexican chocolate or semisweet 
chocolate, chopped 


1/2 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper 

Lumpy Guacamole (recipe follows) 

1. Drain and rinse the soaked beans, and place them 
in a large saucepan with water to cover by 2 inches. 
Bring to a boil, reduce heat, cover, and simmer gently 
until the beans are tender, about 11/2 hours. (You 
can prepare the beans 1 or 2 days ahead; let cool, 
cover, and refrigerate in their liquid.) 
2. Heat 2 tablespoons of the oil in a 1  cast-
iron skillet over medium heat; add the tomatoes, 
and cook, turning occasionally, until skins begin to 
char, about 5 minutes. Cover the pan, reduce heat 
to medium-low, and continue to cook, turning, until 
the tomatoes have softened, 7 to 8 minutes more. 
Transfer to a large bowl. When cool enough to handle, 
peel and core the tomatoes. Place the tomato 
flesh in a clean bowl, and reserve. 
3. While the tomatoes cool, place two-thirds of the 
onion quarters in the same skillet with 2 tablespoons 
of the oil. Cover, and cook over medium 
heat, turning occasionally, until nicely charred and 
softened, 12 to 15 minutes. Transfer to a bowl to cool. 
Repeat with the garlic cloves, remaining onion, and 
another tablespoon oil. When cool enough to handle, 
peel the garlic and onion, cutting off and discarding 
roots and peels and adding the flesh to the 
bowl with the tomato. Transfer the vegetables and 
any juices to a blender in batches (fill no more than 
halfway), and puree until nearly smooth. Set aside 
in a large bowl. 
4. Tear the chiles in half, and discard the stems and 
seeds. In the same skillet over medium heat, toast 
the chiles in the remaining 2 tablespoons oil, turning 
with tongs, until smoky, about 3 minutes. Transfer 
to the blender. Bring the broth and water to a 
boil, pour over the chiles, and let stand until the 
chiles are pliable, about 5 minutes. Puree the chiles 
and broth, and stir into the tomato mixture. 
5. In a 7-quart Dutch oven over medium heat, cook 
one-third of the meat, breaking it up with a spoon 
and stirring occasionally, until nicely browned, 
about 8 minutes. While the meat is cooking, brown 
another third of the meat in the skillet. Then add 
that batch to the first in the Dutch oven. Stir the 
tomato mixture into the meat in the Dutch oven. 
Brown the remaining beef in the same skillet; add 
to the Dutch oven. Drain the cooked beans; add 
them to pot with the salt. 
112 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


6. Bring the chili to a boil, reduce heat, cover, and 
simmer gently, stirring, until the meat is tender and 
the sauce is thick, about 11/2 hours. Stir in the chocolate; 
season with pepper. Serve with the guacamole. 
lumpy guacamole 

MAKES 6 CUPS 

This lively guacamole can also be served as a dip 
with tortilla chips. If you want to make it a day 
ahead, be sure to press plastic wrap directly on the 
surface of the guacamole to prevent browning. 

6 ripe Hass avocados 
1/4 cup fresh lime juice 


1/4 cup fresh lemon juice 
4 plum tomatoes, finely diced 


1 medium onion, finely diced 

1 jalapeno pepper, minced (with seeds, if 
desired) 


3 garlic cloves, minced 
11/4 teaspoons coarse salt 

1/2 teaspoon freshly ground pepper, or to 
taste 


Halve the avocados, and remove the pits. Score the 
flesh into cubes with a small, sharp knife, and 
scrape them into a bowl. Stir in the lime juice, lemon 
juice, tomatoes, onion, chile, and garlic. Season with 
salt and pepper. 

winter vegetable chicken stew 

SERVES 6 

12 ounces boneless, skinless chicken thighs 
(about 4 pieces) 


1 pound boneless, skinless chicken breast 
halves (about 3 pieces) 


1/2 teaspoon coarse salt, plus more for 
cooking water 


1/8 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 
4 slender carrots, peeled 


3 large celery ribs 
2 medium parsnips (6 ounces), peeled 


4 small onions, peeled and quartered 
lengthwise, with roots attached 


3 cups water 

1 141/2-ounce can low-sodium chicken broth, 
skimmed of fat 

1 tablespoon fresh rosemary leaves

1/2 pound wide egg noodles 
1/4 cup finely chopped fresh flat-leaf parsley 


1 tablespoon unsalted butter 

4 garlic cloves, thinly sliced 

1 bunch (11/2 pounds) Swiss chard, coarsely 
chopped, with stems 


2 ounces shaved Parmesan cheese 

1. Cut the chicken into   pieces; season with 
salt and pepper. Heat a 6-quart Dutch oven over 
medium heat until hot. Add half of the chicken to 
the pot; cook, turning occasionally, until nicely 
browned, about 7 minutes. Transfer to a large bowl. 
Repeat. 
2. Meanwhile, cut the carrots, celery, and parsnips 
into   pieces. Place the vegetables, onions, 
browned chicken, water, broth, and rosemary in the 
Dutch oven; scrape the browned bits from the bottom. 
Cover; bring to a simmer over low heat. Cook, 
stirring occasionally, until the vegetables are barely 
tender, about 10 minutes. 
3. Cook the noodles in a pot of boiling salted water 
until al dente; drain and return to pot. Stir in parsley, 
chicken, and any collected juices in the bowl. 
Cook on low until the chicken is heated through, 1 
to 2 minutes. Remove from heat; keep warm. 
4. Meanwhile, melt the butter in a large nonstick 
skillet over medium-high heat. Add the garlic; stir 
until golden, about 1 minute. Add the chard; cook, 
turning occasionally, until tender, about 5 minutes. 
Divide the chard among 6 bowls. Ladle the soup on 
top; serve with shaved Parmesan cheese. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 481 CALORIES, 11 G FAT, 

142 MG CHOLESTEROL, 55 G CARBOHYDRATE, 724 MG 

SODIUM, 41 G PROTEIN, 6 G FIBER 

SOUPS AND STEWS 113 


chicken tortilla soup 

SERVES 6 

Steps 1 and 2 can be done up to 1 day ahead; 
refrigerate until ready to serve. 

11/4 pounds boneless, skinless chicken breast 
halves (3 to 4 pieces) 

2 cups cilantro stems and sprigs plus 
2 tablespoons finely chopped cilantro 


2 141/2-ounce cans low-sodium chicken 
broth, skimmed of fat 


3 cups water 
11/2 tablespoons corn oil 

4 plum tomatoes 

2 small onions, halved lengthwise 
(unpeeled) 


4 garlic cloves (unpeeled) 
1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 


11/4 cups fresh or frozen corn kernels 

3/4 cup rinsed, drained canned chickpeas 
5 fresh corn tortillas (5  diameter), 
cut in  -wide strips 


1/2 small avocado 

2 tablespoons fresh lime juice 
1 tablespoon minced jalapeno pepper 


3 tablespoons reduced-fat sour cream 

1. In a large saucepan, combine the chicken, 2 cups 
cilantro, broth, and water. Bring to a boil, reduce heat, 
and simmer gently until the chicken is just cooked 
through, about 10 minutes. Transfer the chicken 
to a plate; let cool. Cut into   dice. Strain the 
broth through a fine strainer lined with several layers 
of cheesecloth; reserve. Wipe out the pot. 
2. Heat 1/2 tablespoon of the oil in a cast-iron skillet 
over medium-high heat until hot. Add 3 of the 
tomatoes and the onions and garlic; cover and cook, 
turning the vegetables occasionally, until the skins 
are nicely charred, about 10 minutes. Remove from 
heat. When the vegetables are cool enough to handle, 
remove the skins, stems, and cores; discard. 
Place the tomatoes, onions, and garlic in a blender 
with 1/2 cup reserved broth; blend until smooth. 
Scrape the mixture into the saucepan; cook, stirring, 
over medium heat until thickened and darker, 
about 6 minutes. Stir in the remaining broth, 1/4 teaspoon 
salt, corn, chickpeas, and chicken. Remove 
from heat. 

3. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Place the tortilla strips 
on a rimmed baking sheet; toss with the remaining 
tablespoon oil and 1/8 teaspoon salt. Bake until 
golden and crisp, about 12 minutes, turning once 
or twice. Cool. 
4. Finely dice the avocado; gently rinse with cold 
water. Place in a bowl. Finely dice the remaining 
tomato, and add to the avocado with the lime juice, 
jalapeno, chopped cilantro, and remaining 1/8 teaspoon 
salt. Rewarm the soup; ladle into bowls. Garnish 
with the avocado mixture, sour cream, and 
tortilla strips. 
braised lamb stew 

SERVES 8 TO 10 

The stew can be made without dried limes or 
lime powder; just use the 1/2 cup lime juice called 
for as a substitute for the powder. 

6 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

4 pounds boneless leg of lamb


4 medium onions, peeled and thinly sliced 
(about 11/2 pounds) 


4 cloves garlic, thinly sliced 

1 tablespoon coarse salt 
2 teaspoons freshly ground pepper 


2 teaspoons ground turmeric 

1/2 teaspoon ground saffron, dissolved in 
1 tablespoon hot water 


6 whole dried Persian limes, pierced 
1 cup dried kidney beans 


114 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


4 cups water 
6 cups finely chopped fresh flat-leaf parsley 

2 cups finely chopped garlic chives or 
scallions 


2 cups finely chopped fresh cilantro 
1 teaspoon ground fenugreek 


4 tablespoons dried Persian lime powder or 
1/2 cup fresh lime juice 

1. Heat 4 tablespoons of the olive oil in a medium 
stockpot over medium heat. Add the lamb, onions, 
and garlic, and cook, stirring occasionally, until the 
meat is no longer pink and the onions are softened, 
about 20 minutes. Add the salt, pepper, turmeric, 
saffron water, whole dried Persian limes, and kidney 
beans; cook a few minutes more. Add the water. 
Bring to a boil, cover, and simmer over low heat, 
stirring occasionally. 
2. Meanwhile, heat a large nonstick skillet over 
medium-low heat. Add the chopped parsley, chives, 
cilantro, and fenugreek. Cook, stirring frequently, 
until they are wilted, about 10 minutes. Add the remaining 
2 tablespoons oil, and cook, stirring constantly, 
until the herbs are very fragrant, about 10 
minutes more. 
3. Add the sauteed herbs and lime powder to the 
lamb mixture. Cover; simmer until the meat and 
beans are tender, about 21/2 hours. Uncover the stew, 
and cook until the beans are very tender and stew 
has thickened slightly. Adjust the seasoning, if necessary, 
and serve hot. 
cream of belgian endive soup 

SERVES 8 TO 10 

2 medium leeks, white and light-green parts 
only 

8 heads Belgian endive, plus more for 
garnish 


2 medium russet potatoes 

3 tablespoons unsalted butter 
1/2 cup dry white wine 


5 cups homemade or low-sodium canned 
chicken or vegetable stock 


1 cup heavy cream 
11/2 teaspoons coarse salt 

1/4 teaspoon freshly ground white pepper 
Generous pinch of freshly grated nutmeg 


1. Cut the leeks in half lengthwise. Rinse well under 
cold running water to remove any grit. Thinly slice 
crosswise; set aside. 
2. Cut the endives in half lengthwise, and cut out 
the cores. Thinly slice crosswise; set aside. 
3. Peel the potatoes, and cut into   pieces. Set 
aside in a bowl of cold water. 
4. Heat the butter in a saucepan over medium heat. 
Add the leeks; cook until they start to soften, about 
3 minutes. Drain the potatoes well; add to the pot 
along with the sliced endive. Cook until the vegetables 
begin to soften, about 10 minutes; do not 
let brown. 
5. Add the wine and stock, and bring to a gentle 
simmer. Cook until the vegetables are very tender, 
about 1 hour. Cool slightly. 
6. Transfer the soup in batches to a blender (fill 
no more than halfway), or pass it through a food 
mill. Return the soup to a clean saucepan; stir in the 
cream. Bring to a simmer; remove from heat. Season 
with the salt, pepper, and nutmeg. Garnish with 
the endive. 
SOUPS AND STEWS 115 


cioppino 

SERVES 6 

1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil 

1 medium onion, thinly sliced 

4 garlic cloves, minced 

1 dried bay leaf 
2 tablespoons finely chopped fresh oregano 

2 tablespoons finely chopped fresh 
flat-leaf parsley 


1/2 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes 

2 cups dry white wine 

2 cups fish stock 

1/2 cup clam juice 
1 28-ounce can crushed tomatoes, with juice 


1 15-ounce can plum tomatoes, 
drained, chopped 


6 cherrystone clams, scrubbed 

6 mussels, scrubbed, debearded 

6 sea scallops, muscles removed 

8 ounces cod or other white fish, cut into 
  pieces 


8 ounces cleaned squid, bodies cut 
into rings 


6 large shrimp, peeled, tails intact, 
deveined 


1. Heat the oil in a large pot over medium-high heat. 
Add the onion, garlic, and bay leaf. Cook until the 
onion is translucent, about 5 minutes. Add the 
oregano, parsley, and red pepper flakes. Cook 1 
minute. Add the wine, stock, clam juice, and tomatoes. 
Reduce heat; simmer gently 30 minutes. (You 
can make the soup to this point up to 2 days ahead, 
and chill. Reheat; add seafood.) 
2. Add the clams; cook, covered, for 10 minutes. Add 
the mussels; cook, covered, checking often and 
using tongs to transfer open clams and mussels to 
a bowl. Discard any that do not open. Add the scallops, 
cod, squid, and shrimp to the pan; simmer gently 
until the seafood is cooked through, about 5 
minutes. Gently stir in the cooked clams and mussels; 
ladle into bowls, and serve. 
chilled asian chicken soup 

MAKES 1 QUART 

You can use the mushroom broth from this recipe 
in other soups and dishes as well; it is particularly 
good in risottos. For a heartier version, add 
cooked and drained soba or udon noodles, or 
serve brown rice on the side. This soup can be 
prepared through step 2 up to 3 days in advance; 
for best results, store the broth separately from 
all other items. Proceed with step 3 the day the 
soup will be served. 

6 cups water 

1/2 cup mixed dried mushrooms, such as 
porcini, shiitake, oyster, or wood ear 


1 whole chicken breast (about 10 ounces) 
1 carrot, roughly chopped 


1 tablespoon roughly chopped 
jalapeno pepper 


11/2 tablespoons roughly chopped fresh ginger 

3 garlic cloves, crushed 
1 teaspoon whole black peppercorns 


1 tablespoon sugar 
1/2 cup firm tofu, cut into   dice 


Juice of 1 lime (about 3 tablespoons) 
11/2 tablespoons roughly chopped fresh mint 

11/2 tablespoons roughly chopped fresh basil 
11/2 tablespoons roughly chopped 
fresh cilantro 
1 teaspoon soy sauce 

1. Bring the water to a boil in a medium saucepan. 
Remove from heat, and add the mushrooms; let sit 
until softened, at least 30 minutes. Strain the mushrooms 
through a cheesecloth-lined sieve to remove 
any sandy grit; discard the mushrooms. 
2. Return the mushroom broth to a clean medium 
saucepan, and add the chicken, carrot, jalapeno, ginger, 
garlic, and peppercorns. Bring just to a boil; reduce 
heat, and simmer over medium heat 20 
minutes, or until the broth is reduced to about 4 
cups. Strain through a fine sieve back into the 
saucepan, reserving the broth and discarding everything 
but the chicken. 
116 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


3. Remove the chicken meat from the bones, and 
shred the meat. Return the chicken meat to the 
mushroom broth; add the sugar, tofu, lime juice, 
herbs, and soy sauce, and stir to combine. Transfer 
to a covered container; refrigerate until well chilled, 
at least 2 hours or overnight before serving. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 149 CALORIES, 6 G FAT, 

32 MG CHOLESTEROL, 11 G CARBOHYDRATE, 188 MG 

SODIUM, 14 G PROTEIN, 1 G FIBER 

cold curried buttermilk soup 
with corn and poblano chile 

MAKES 1 QUART 

This soup can be made up to 1 day ahead and 
stored, covered, in the refrigerator; stir it again 
before serving, as it may separate while it sits. 
Poblano chiles vary in heat from mild to hot; you 
may need more or less to taste. If you like, garnish 
each serving with more cooked corn. 

1 teaspoon vegetable oil 

1/2 yellow onion, finely chopped (about 1 cup) 

1/2 poblano chile, seeded and finely chopped 

(about 1/2 cup) 

1 large garlic clove, minced 

1 teaspoon ground coriander 

1/2 teaspoon ground cumin 

1/8 teaspoon ground turmeric 
21/4 cups corn kernels (about 4 ears) 

3 cups nonfat buttermilk 

3/4 teaspoon coarse salt 
1. Heat the oil in a medium saucepan over medium 
heat. Add the onion, poblano chile, and garlic; saute 
until the onion is soft and translucent and the chile 
and garlic are tender and fragrant, about 5 minutes. 
2. Add the coriander, cumin, and turmeric, and cook 
until they are toasted and fragrant, about 2 minutes. 
Add the corn, and saute until the kernels are lightly 
browned, about 5 minutes. Remove from heat, and 
let cool slightly. 
3. Transfer 11/2 cups of the corn mixture to the bowl 
of a food processor fitted with the metal blade, and 
add the buttermilk and salt; puree until the mixture 
is smooth. Transfer to a large bowl or plastic storage 
container; stir in the remaining corn mixture. 
Cover with plastic wrap, and place in the refrigerator 
until the soup is well chilled, at least 2 to 3 
hours before serving. 

FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 177 CALORIES, 4 G FAT, 

7 MG CHOLESTEROL, 27 G CARBOHYDRATE, 643 MG SODIUM, 

9 G PROTEIN, 5 G FIBER 

cucumber coconut soup 

SERVES 6 

2 cups homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock 


1 whole skinless, boneless chicken breast 
2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 


1 onion, finely chopped 
1 large garlic clove, minced 


1 jalapeno pepper, seeded and minced 

2 pounds cucumbers, peeled, seeded, and 
cut into   pieces 


1 131/2-ounce can unsweetened coconut milk 
1/2 cup lightly packed fresh cilantro leaves 


1/4 cup fresh lime juice 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


1. Bring the chicken stock to a boil in a small 
saucepan. Add the chicken; return to a simmer, and 
reduce heat. Cook, covered, until the chicken is 
cooked through, about 12 minutes. Transfer the 
chicken to a plate, reserving the stock, and let cool. 
2. Heat the olive oil in a medium saute pan over 
medium heat. Add the onion; cook until soft and 
translucent, about 4 minutes. Add the garlic, 
jalapeno, and cucumbers; cook 1 minute more. Add 
the reserved chicken stock, and bring to a simmer; 
cook until the cucumbers are tender, about 5 minutes. 
Remove from heat; let cool slightly. 
3. Working in batches, transfer the cucumber mixture 
to a blender or food processor, and puree until 
smooth. Add the coconut milk and cilantro to the 
last batch, pureeing until cilantro is very finely 
chopped. Transfer to a large bowl, and cover with 
plastic wrap; refrigerate until completely cool. Stir 
in the lime juice, and season with salt and pepper. 
4. To serve, shred the chicken into bite-size pieces. 
Ladle the soup into bowls; top each with chicken, 
and garnish with some cilantro leaves. 
SOUPS AND STEWS 117 


creamy caramelized onion soup 

MAKES 8 CUPS; SERVES 6 TO 8 

6 tablespoons unsalted butter 

11/4 pounds leeks (3 to 4), white and pale-
green parts only, rinsed well and 
coarsely chopped 

5 garlic cloves, thinly sliced 

7 large shallots (about 14 ounces), 
thinly sliced 


2 large Vidalia onions (about 20 ounces 
each), cut into  -thick slices 


3/4 cup dry white vermouth 
4 cups homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock 


Coarse salt 

1 cup heavy cream 

1. Melt 4 tablespoons of the butter in a large 
saucepan over medium heat. Add the leeks, garlic, 
shallots, and half of the onions. Cook, stirring occasionally, 
until the vegetables are very soft and 
translucent, about 10 minutes. Reduce heat to 
medium-low, and cook, stirring occasionally, until 
the vegetables are deep golden brown, about 25 
minutes. 
2. Add the vermouth, stock, and 1 teaspoon salt. 
Bring to a boil. Reduce heat to medium-low. Simmer, 
stirring occasionally, 15 minutes. Let cool. 
Puree the onion mixture in batches in a blender 
until smooth, about 3 minutes per batch. Set aside. 
3. Meanwhile, melt the remaining 2 tablespoons 
butter in a medium skillet over medium-low heat. 
Add the remaining onion. Cook, stirring occasionally, 
until the onion is very soft and golden brown, 
about 45 minutes. Cover, and set aside. 
4. Return the onion puree to the saucepan. Stir in 
the cream. Reheat over medium heat, stirring, until 
heated through but not boiling. Season with salt, if 
desired. Serve, topped with caramelized onions. 
chilled yogurt-spinach soup 
with shrimp 

MAKES 5 CUPS; SERVES 4 

11/2 cucumbers (about 1 pound), peeled, 
seeded, and cut into   pieces 

2 7-ounce containers plain low-fat 
(2 percent) Greek yogurt 


13/4 cups low-sodium store-bought chicken 
broth 

2 scallions, white and pale-green parts cut 
crosswise into   pieces, dark-green 
parts julienned 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
1 tablespoon olive oil 


2 garlic cloves, minced 

5 ounces baby spinach 

1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon finely 
chopped red onion 


1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon fresh 
lemon juice 


1 pound rock shrimp, rinsed well 

1. Stir together the cucumbers, half the yogurt, 3/4 
cup of the broth, the pieces of scallions, and 1 teaspoon 
salt; season with pepper. Heat the oil in a 
large skillet over medium heat until hot but not 
smoking. Add the garlic; cook until just golden, 
about 1 minute. Add the spinach; cook, stirring, until 
wilted, about 3 minutes. Stir into the yogurt mixture. 
2. Working in batches, puree the mixture in a food 
processor. Transfer to a large bowl, and stir in the 
remaining yogurt, the onion, and the lemon juice. 
Refrigerate, covered, until cold, about 1 hour. 
3. Meanwhile, put the remaining 1 cup broth, 3/4 cup 
water, and 1/2 teaspoon salt in a medium saucepan; 
season with pepper. Bring to a boil. Add the shrimp; 
cook until pink and cooked through, 2 to 3 minutes. 
Drain. Refrigerate the shrimp, covered, until cold, 
about 1 hour. Divide the soup and shrimp among 
4 bowls. Garnish with julienned scallions. 
118 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


zucchini-mint soup 

SERVES 4 

You can also serve this soup cold or at room temperature. 
Puree it in batches to prevent overflow 
(particularly because you do so while it's hot), if 
needed. You can stir in a small amount of water 
to thin the soup after pureeing it, if you like. 

2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

1 medium white onion, finely chopped 
(about 11/4 cups) 


1 small garlic clove, crushed with the 
flat side of a large knife 


Coarse salt 

3 medium zucchini (about 11/2 pounds), 
thinly sliced crosswise 


11/4 cups homemade or low-sodium store-
bought chicken stock 

2 tablespoons thinly sliced fresh 
mint leaves 


1. Heat the oil in a medium saucepan over medium 
heat. Add the onion, garlic, and 3/4 teaspoon salt. 
Cook, stirring often, until the onion is translucent, 
about 2 minutes. Add the zucchini; cook, stirring 
occasionally, until the skins turn bright green, about 
3 minutes. Add the stock and 1 cup water; bring to 
a boil. Reduce heat to medium-low. Simmer, partially 
covered, until the zucchini is tender, about 
12 minutes. Let cool slightly. 
2. Puree the zucchini mixture in a food processor. 
Return to the pan. Stir in 1 tablespoon of the mint. 
Season with salt, if desired. Sprinkle with the remaining 
tablespoon mint. Serve immediately. Keep 
warm on stove over medium-low heat, if necessary. 
herbed tomato soup 

MAKES ABOUT 8 CUPS 

1/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons olive oil 

2 medium onions, coarsely chopped 
12 large garlic cloves 


2 celery stalks, coarsely chopped 
1/4 cup chopped fresh flat-leaf parsley 


2 tablespoons coarsely chopped fresh 
lovage or celery leaves 


1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon coarse salt 

6 pounds tomatoes, chopped 

1 to 11/2 cups homemade or low-sodium 
store-bought chicken stock 


1/2 cup thinly sliced fresh basil leaves 
Crostini, for serving (recipe follows) 


1. Heat the oil in a large pot over medium heat. Add 
the onions, garlic, celery, parsley, lovage, and salt. 
Cook, stirring, until the onions are translucent, 
about 5 minutes. Stir in the tomatoes and stock; 
bring to a boil. Reduce heat; simmer until the tomatoes 
are soft and mixture is slightly reduced, 15 to 
20 minutes. Stir in the basil; cook until fragrant, 
about 5 minutes. 
2. Pass the soup through the medium plate of a food 
mill set over a large bowl; discard the solids. Reheat; 
serve with crostini. 
crostini 

MAKES 10 

10  -thick slices rustic Italian bread 

10 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
1 tablespoon coarse salt 


Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Arrange the bread in a 
single layer on a rimmed baking sheet. Brush with 
the oil; sprinkle with the salt. Bake until the edges 
are golden, 5 to 8 minutes. 

SOUPS AND STEWS 119 


spring vegetable soup 
with pesto 

SERVES 6 

1 cup dried navy or white beans, rinsed 

1 bay leaf 
1 teaspoon fresh thyme, finely chopped 


2 medium leeks, diced and rinsed well 
2 medium carrots, diced 


8 ounces Red Bliss or Yukon Gold potatoes, 
peeled and cubed 


1 pound plum tomatoes, cubed 

2 cups low-sodium vegetable broth 
2 small garlic cloves 


2 cups loosely packed fresh basil leaves 
1/4 cup finely grated Parmesan cheese 


2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

4 ounces green beans, cut into   
pieces 


1 small zucchini, cubed 
1 cup fresh shelled or thawed frozen peas 


1 teaspoon coarse salt 
Freshly ground pepper 


1. Cover the beans with 6 cups cold water in a large 
pot. Bring to a boil; remove from heat. Let stand, 
covered, 1 hour. 
2. Drain the beans; return to the pot. Cover with 
3 quarts cold water. Add the bay leaf and thyme; 
bring to a boil. Reduce heat to medium; simmer, 
partially covered, until the beans are barely tender, 
about 2 hours. 
3. Add the leeks, carrots, potatoes, tomatoes, broth, 
and 2 cups water. Simmer, partially covered, until 
the beans are tender, about 30 minutes to 1 hour. 
4. Make the pesto: Finely chop the garlic in a food 
processor. Add the basil; process. Add the cheese 
and oil; process until combined. 
5. Add the green beans and zucchini to the pot. 
Cook, uncovered, 20 minutes. Add the peas; cook 
until soft, 5 to 10 minutes. Season with salt and pepper. 
Divide among bowls; top each with 1 heaping 
teaspoon pesto. 
vietnamese beef noodle soup 
with ginger 

SERVES 4 

The stock must be refrigerated at least 6 hours; 
make it 1 day ahead. 

8 whole star anise 

1 whole cinnamon stick 

6 whole cloves 

1 piece (4 inches) peeled fresh ginger 

2 medium onions, halved 

4 pounds oxtail, rinsed thoroughly 

6 scallions, white and pale-green parts only, 
cut into   pieces, plus 4 scallions, 
thinly sliced on the diagonal 

1 teaspoon whole black peppercorns 

1 teaspoon coarse salt 

8 ounces eye of round or sirloin of beef 

8 ounces thin rice noodles (rice sticks) 

2 shallots, thinly sliced 

3/4 cup fresh bean sprouts 
3/4 cup fresh cilantro sprigs 
3/4 cup fresh basil leaves 
1 lime, quartered 
1. Make the stock: Heat the star anise, cinnamon, 
and cloves in a small, dry skillet over medium-high 
heat until fragrant, about 2 minutes. Transfer to a 
6-quart stockpot. 
2. Preheat the broiler. Broil the ginger and onions, 
flipping once, until blackened, about 5 minutes per 
side. Transfer to the pot. Add the oxtail,   scallion 
pieces, and peppercorns. Add 5 quarts water; 
bring to a boil. Skim foam. Add the salt. Reduce 
heat. Simmer, skimming occasionally, 21/2 hours. 
3. Pour the stock through a large sieve into a large 
bowl; discard the solids. Let cool 20 minutes. Pour 
through a cheesecloth-lined sieve into a large bowl. 
Refrigerate, covered, 6 hours or overnight. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 414 CALORIES, 6 G FAT, 

24 MG CHOLESTEROL, 63 G CARBOHYDRATE, 312 MG 

SODIUM, 24 G PROTEIN, 4 G FIBER 

120 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


4. Make the soup: Chill the beef in the freezer until 
firm, about 2 hours. Cover the noodles with cold 
water. Let stand until the noodles are softened, 
about 30 minutes; drain. 
5. Cut the beef in half. Place each half flat side down, 
and cut the beef against the grain as thinly as possible. 
Allow the beef to warm to room temperature. 
6. Skim the fat from the stock; discard. Transfer the 
stock to a pot; add the shallots, and bring to a boil. 
Reduce heat, and simmer until the shallots are soft, 
about 15 minutes. 
7. In a medium pot of boiling water, cook the noodles 
until just tender, about 10 seconds; drain. 
8. Divide the noodles, beef, and sprouts among 4 
bowls. Add the simmering stock (it will cook the 
beef gently). Top with thinly sliced scallions and 
herbs; serve each bowl with a lime wedge. 
matzo ball soup 
with duck meatballs 

SERVES 10 

1 fresh duck (about 7 pounds), cut into 
8 pieces 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
6 carrots, cut into   pieces 


6 celery stalks, cut into   pieces 
6 medium onions, quartered (do not peel) 


6 sprigs fresh flat-leaf parsley and 1/4 cup 
chopped leaves, plus leaves for garnish 


6 fresh thyme sprigs and 1/4 cup chopped 
leaves 


14 ounces shiitake mushrooms, stemmed 

6 large eggs plus 1 large egg white 

2 cups matzo meal 

1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Season the duck with 
salt and pepper. Transfer to a roasting pan. Add the 
carrots, celery, and onions; season with salt and pepper. 
Roast the duck and vegetables, turning occasionally, 
until the duck is browned, about 11/2 hours. 
2. Transfer the duck and vegetables to a 12-quart 
stockpot, reserving the fat. Pour the fat through a 
fine sieve into a bowl; cover and refrigerate. Add 
8 quarts cold water and the herb sprigs to the pot. 
Bring to a boil; continue to boil for 10 minutes. Reduce 
heat to low; simmer 11/2 hours. 
3. Pour the stock through a sieve into another large 
pot; reserve the meat, and discard the vegetables. 
Season the stock with salt and pepper. Let cool. 
Skim off any fat, and add to the reserved fat in refrigerator. 
4. Remove the meat from the bones; discard the 
skin and bones. Process the meat, mushrooms, 2 
eggs, the egg white, 1 cup matzo meal, the chopped 
herbs, 1/4 cup reserved fat, 1 tablespoon salt, and 1/2 
teaspoon pepper in a food processor until a paste 
forms. Shape into 60 1  meatballs. Refrigerate, 
covered, until ready to use. 
5. Melt 1/4 cup reserved duck fat in a small saucepan 
over low heat. Lightly beat the remaining 4 eggs 
in a bowl. Whisk in the melted fat, 1/4 cup water, and 
1 teaspoon salt; season with pepper. Stir in the remaining 
cup matzo meal. Refrigerate, covered, until 
slightly firm, 30 minutes to 1 hour. 
6. Bring the stock to a boil. Scoop out 26 1  
balls of the matzo mixture, and add to the stock. Reduce 
heat; simmer 10 minutes. Add the meatballs; 
simmer 10 minutes. Garnish with parsley. 
SOUPS AND STEWS 121 


chicken soup with 
parsley dumplings 

SERVES 6 

4 boneless, skinless chicken breast 
halves (about 11/4 pounds total), each 
cut into 3 pieces 


6 boneless, skinless chicken thighs 
(about 11/4 pounds total) 


4 medium carrots (about 3/4 pound), cut on 
the diagonal into   rounds 


1 medium onion, thinly sliced into 
half-moons 


2 celery stalks, cut into   pieces 

1 garlic clove, thinly sliced 

1 bay leaf 

11/2 cups homemade or low-sodium 
store-bought chicken stock 
Coarse salt 

1 teaspoon coarsely chopped fresh thyme 
1/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons yellow cornmeal 


3/4 cup all-purpose flour 
1 teaspoon baking powder 
2 tablespoons finely chopped shallot 

1 tablespoon freshly grated lemon zest 

3/4 cup finely chopped fresh flat-leaf parsley 
2 tablespoons finely grated Parmesan cheese 
11/2 tablespoons cold unsalted butter, 
cut into small pieces 

1/2 cup low-fat (1 percent) milk 

1. Bring 2 quarts water and the chicken, carrots, 
onion, celery, garlic, bay leaf, stock, and 1/8 teaspoon 
salt to a boil in a medium pot; skim froth. Reduce 
heat to medium-low; gently simmer 20 minutes. 
Add the thyme. 
2. Meanwhile, whisk together the cornmeal, flour, 
baking powder, 1/2 teaspoon salt, shallot, zest, parsley, 
and cheese in a medium bowl. Add the butter, 
and blend it in with your fingertips until the mixture 
resembles coarse meal. Add the milk, and stir 
with a fork just until a dough forms. 
3. Roll the dough into   balls; add all at once 
to the simmering broth. Cover; simmer, undisturbed, 
until the dumplings are cooked through, 
about 20 minutes. Divide the soup among 6 bowls. 
beet soup with indian spices 

SERVES 6 

Buying beets with the greens attached-as required 
for this recipe-is a sure way to know 
they're fresh. Beets are often cooked before 
they're peeled or cut to keep nutrients intact. 
Here, the prep work is done first without sacrifice: 
The juices that result make up the nutritious 
broth and give the soup its deep flavor and color. 

5 or 6 medium red beets with greens (about 
21/2 pounds with greens), stems and greens 
cut off and reserved 

2 teaspoons canola oil 

1 medium onion, halved lengthwise and 
cut into thin half-moons 


1 tablespoon minced garlic 
11/2 teaspoons ground cumin 

1 teaspoon ground coriander 
Pinch of cayenne pepper, or to taste 


1/8 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 

3 plum tomatoes, seeded and cut 
into   dice (about 11/4 cups) 


3/4 teaspoon coarse salt 
13/4 cups homemade or low-sodium store-
bought chicken stock 

1/3 cup plain low-fat yogurt 

1. Cut the beet greens into thin strips and the stems 
into   pieces; set both aside. Peel the beets 
with a vegetable peeler; cut into  -thick 
matchsticks. Set aside. 
2. Heat the oil in a large saucepan over medium 
heat until hot but not smoking. Add the onion; cook, 
stirring occasionally, until softened and just 
browned, about 7 minutes. Add the garlic; cook until 
fragrant, about 1 minute. Add the cumin, coriander, 
cayenne, and pepper; cook, stirring, until fragrant, 
about 1 minute. 
3. Add the tomatoes and salt; cook, scraping up any 
browned bits from the bottom of the pan, until the 
juices are released, about 2 minutes. Add the stock 
and 41/2 cups water (for a thinner consistency, add 
122 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


up to 5 cups water); bring to a boil. Add the beets 
and stems. Reduce heat; simmer until the beets are 
tender, about 35 minutes. 

4. Add the greens; cook until just tender, about 5 
minutes. Divide the soup among 6 bowls; divide 
the yogurt among the servings. 
southwestern corn chowder 

SERVES 4 TO 6 

4 ounces bacon (5 or 6 slices)


1 medium onion, cut into   cubes 

1 large carrot, cut into   cubes 
2 celery stalks, cut into   cubes 


1 fresh small poblano chile, seeded and cut 
into   dice 

Coarse salt 

1/2 teaspoon ground cumin 
Freshly ground pepper 


Pinch of cayenne pepper 
1 cup dry white wine 


1 pound Yukon Gold potatoes, peeled 
and cut into   cubes 


5 cups homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken or vegetable stock 


3 cups fresh corn kernels (about 6 ears) 

1 cup heavy cream 

1/4 cup chopped fresh cilantro, plus 
more for garnish 


Hot sauce, such as Tabasco (optional) 

1. Heat a large, dry pot over medium heat. Add the 
bacon pieces, and cook, stirring occasionally, until 
crisp, about 5 minutes. Transfer with a spatula or 
slotted spoon to paper towels to drain. 
2. Add the onion to the pot; cook until just softened, 
about 4 minutes. Add the carrot, celery, and 
poblano; cook until the vegetables are just tender, 
about 5 minutes. Stir in 1 teaspoon salt, the cumin, 
1/4 teaspoon pepper, and the cayenne. Raise heat to 
high; add the wine. Cook until most liquid has evaporated, 
2 to 3 minutes. Add the potatoes and stock; 
bring to a boil. Reduce heat to medium-low; gently 
simmer until all the vegetables are tender, about 
20 minutes. 
3. Stir in the corn and cream; cook until the corn is 
tender (do not let cream boil), about 5 minutes 
more. Stir in the 1/4 cup cilantro. Season with salt 
and pepper. Garnish with cilantro and reserved 
bacon pieces; add hot sauce, if desired. 
mushroom soup with poached 
eggs and parmesan cheese 

SERVES 4 

1/2 ounce dried mushrooms, such as porcini 
(about 1/2 cup) 
2 cups boiling water 


11/2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
1 medium onion, halved and thinly sliced 
into half-moons 

3 garlic cloves, minced 
1 celery stalk, finely chopped (about 1/2 cup) 


1 pound cremini or white mushrooms, 
caps and stems thinly sliced lengthwise 
(about 6 cups) 


1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 

1/2 cup dry white wine 

2 cups homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken or vegetable stock 


1 tablespoon finely chopped fresh tarragon, 
plus 4 sprigs for garnish 

4 large eggs 

1 ounce Parmesan cheese, thinly shaved 
with a vegetable peeler 


Freshly ground pepper 

1. Soak the dried mushrooms in boiling water, covered, 
until soft, about 20 minutes. Lift out the mushrooms; 
squeeze over the liquid. Finely chop; set 
aside. Pour the liquid through a fine sieve into a 
bowl; reserve. 
2. Heat the oil in a medium saucepan over medium 
heat until hot but not smoking. Add the onion, garlic, 
and celery; cook, stirring occasionally, until soft, 
about 8 minutes. Add the fresh mushrooms and salt; 
cook, stirring occasionally, until most of the liquid 
has evaporated and the mushrooms are soft, about 
12 minutes. Raise heat to high. Add the wine, 
SOUPS AND STEWS 123 


reserved mushrooms and liquid, stock, and 11/2 cups 
water; bring to a simmer. Reduce heat to medium-
low; cook 30 minutes. Add the chopped tarragon. 

3. Fill another medium saucepan three-quarters full 
with water; bring to a bare simmer over medium 
heat. Crack the eggs into the pan; cook until the 
whites are set but the yolks are slightly runny, 3 to 
4 minutes. 
4. Divide the soup among 4 bowls. Transfer 1 egg 
to each bowl; divide the cheese among the eggs. 
Season each serving with pepper, and garnish with 
a tarragon sprig. 
roasted carrot soup 

SERVES 2 

You can make this soup through step 2 the day 
before your dinner; refrigerate, covered, until 
you're ready to finish. 

1 small onion 

1 bunch carrots (about 1 pound), peeled 
and cut into   chunks 


1 small Belgian endive, quartered 
lengthwise 


2 tablespoons olive oil 

1/4 teaspoon coarse salt, plus more 
for seasoning 


Pinch of freshly ground pepper, plus 
more for seasoning 


1 bay leaf 

2 cups homemade or low-sodium 
store-bought chicken stock, plus more 
for thinning 


1/3 cup heavy cream or milk 

1/4 teaspoon grated peeled fresh ginger, 
or to taste 


Creme fraiche, for garnish (optional) 

1. Preheat the oven to 450 degrees F. Cut the onion into 8 
wedges (keep the root end intact to hold the layers 
together). Toss the onion, carrots, endive, oil, 
salt, and pepper in a medium bowl. Transfer to a 
rimmed baking sheet, and spread in a single layer. 
Roast the vegetables, turning occasionally, until the 
edges are deep golden brown, about 30 minutes. 
2. Cut off the root end from the onion. Transfer all 
vegetables to a large saucepan, and add the bay leaf. 
Add enough stock to just cover (about 2 cups). 
Bring to a simmer, and cook until the carrots are 
very soft, about 30 minutes. Let cool slightly, and 
discard the bay leaf. Puree the vegetables and stock 
in a blender until smooth (work in batches, if necessary, 
to avoid filling blender more than halfway). 
3. Transfer the puree to a clean pan; place over low 
heat. Stir in the cream; add stock to thin the soup 
to desired consistency. Season with salt and pepper; 
stir in the ginger. If desired, pipe creme fraiche 
onto each serving, or place a dollop on top. 
broccoli soup 
with cheddar toasts 


SERVES 8 

This soup derives its body and rich flavor from 
pureed broccoli stems and florets. 

11/2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
1 medium onion, coarsely chopped 

2 garlic cloves, coarsely chopped 

2 bunches broccoli (about 31/4 pounds), 
stems and florets chopped separately 
into   pieces 


7 cups homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock 


1 teaspoon coarse salt 
1 cup skim milk 


1/8 teaspoon cayenne pepper 
2 ounces extra-sharp Cheddar cheese, 
grated or crumbled (about 1/2 cup) 
8 thin slices crusty baguette 


1. Heat the oil in a large pot over medium heat until 
hot but not smoking. Add the onion, garlic, and 
broccoli stems; cover, and cook, stirring occasionally, 
until the vegetables are soft, about 15 minutes. 
Add the stock and salt; cover, raise heat to medium-
high, and bring to a boil. Add the broccoli florets; 
reduce heat, and simmer, uncovered, until the florets 
are just tender, about 10 minutes. 
124 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


2. Remove the soup from heat, and let cool, about 
10 minutes. Fill a blender no more than halfway to 
puree the soup in batches until smooth. Return the 
soup to the pot; stir in the milk and cayenne. Cook 
over medium heat until heated through (do not boil). 
3. Heat the broiler. Divide the cheese among the 
bread slices; toast under the broiler until melted 
and golden brown, 45 to 60 seconds. Divide the 
soup among bowls. Top each bowl with a cheese 
toast, and serve. 
cauliflower soup with 
toasted pumpkinseeds 

SERVES 8 TO 10 

White pepper is used because of its color, but 
black pepper will also work. 

1 fresh or dried bay leaf 
4 whole cloves 


13/4 cups homemade or low-sodium 
store-bought chicken stock 

1 head cauliflower, trimmed and cut 
into   florets 


1 russet potato, peeled and quartered 

1 bulb fennel, trimmed and chopped 
into   pieces 


1 large white onion, coarsely chopped 

1/2 cup milk 
Pinch of freshly grated nutmeg 


Coarse salt and freshly ground white 
pepper 

Toasted Pumpkinseeds (recipe follows) 
1/4 cup pumpkinseed oil (optional) 


1. Wrap the bay leaf and cloves in cheesecloth; tie 
with kitchen twine. Place in a large saucepan; add 
the stock, cauliflower, potato, fennel, onion, and 51/2 
cups water. Bring to a boil; reduce heat, and simmer 
until the vegetables are very tender, about 25 
minutes. Discard the clove bundle. 
2. Working in batches and filling the blender no 
more than halfway, puree the soup until smooth. 
Return the soup to the saucepan; stir in the milk. 
Place over medium heat until just heated through 
(do not boil). Add the nutmeg, and season with salt 
and pepper. 
3. Sprinkle the soup with pumpkinseeds, and drizzle 
with pumpkinseed oil, if desired. Serve hot or at 
room temperature. 
toasted pumpkinseeds 

MAKES 1 CUP 

1 cup raw pumpkinseeds or pepitas, hulled 

1 tablespoon olive oil 
Coarse salt 


Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Combine the seeds and 
oil on a parchment-lined rimmed baking sheet. Season 
with salt; toss to combine. Spread in a single 
layer. Toast until crisp, stirring occasionally, about 
10 minutes. 

four-onion ginger soup 
with goat cheese toasts 

SERVES 6 

You will need to make the stock at least 1 day before 
you make the soup. 

12 thin slices bacon (about 1/2 pound) 

11/2 pounds each white, yellow, and red 
onions, thinly sliced lengthwise 

1 piece (1 ounce) fresh ginger, peeled 
and finely julienned (1/3 cup) 


11/2 pounds shallots, thinly sliced 

2 tablespoons very thinly sliced fresh sage 
leaves, plus leaves for garnish 


2 quarts Dark Chicken Stock (recipe 
follows) 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
1/2 baguette, halved lengthwise 


Olive oil, for brushing 
3 ounces fresh goat cheese 


1. In a large high-sided skillet, cook the bacon 
over medium heat, turning occasionally, until 
crisp, about 10 minutes. Transfer the bacon to a 
paper-towel-lined plate to drain. Pour off all but 
11/2 tablespoons fat; reserve for another use. 
SOUPS AND STEWS 125 


2. Add the onions and ginger to the skillet; cook 
over medium heat, stirring occasionally, 30 minutes. 
Add the shallots and sage. Continue cooking, 
stirring occasionally as onions reduce, until they 
are very soft and caramelized, about 1 hour. (Add a 
few tablespoons stock or water if the onions start 
to stick to the skillet.) 
3. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Pour the stock into 
the skillet, and bring it to a boil. Reduce heat to a 
simmer, and cook 15 minutes more. Season with salt 
and pepper. 
4. Meanwhile, cut each bread half diagonally into 
6  -thick pieces. Brush with oil; season with 
salt and pepper. Arrange on a baking sheet, and 
toast in the oven until golden, about 20 minutes. 
5. Spread the toasts with goat cheese; top each with 
a bacon slice. Divide the soup among 6 bowls; garnish 
with sage leaves, and serve each with 2 toasts 
on the side. 
dark chicken stock 

MAKES 2 QUARTS 

3 pounds chicken thighs 

3 pounds chicken wings 

2 large Spanish onions, quartered 
1 bunch carrots, trimmed and cut into 
  pieces 
7 stalks celery, cut into   pieces 


1 garlic head, halved crosswise 

2 fresh or dried bay leaves 

1 tablespoon whole black peppercorns 
1/2 bunch fresh flat-leaf parsley 


1. Preheat the oven to 450 degrees F. Arrange the chicken 
pieces in a single layer in a large roasting pan. 
Roast, turning once halfway through, until skins are 
golden brown and crisp, about 11/2 hours. Add the 
onions, carrots, celery, and garlic; roast 30 minutes 
more. Transfer to a large stockpot; set aside. 
2. Pour 1 cup water into the roasting pan; bring to 
a boil over high heat. Deglaze the pan, scraping 
up the browned bits from the bottom with a wooden 
spoon; pour the liquid into the pot. Add the bay 
leaves, peppercorns, parsley, and 31/2 quarts water; 
bring to a boil over high heat, skimming foam from 
surface. Reduce heat; simmer 3 hours. 

3. Remove the solids from the stock; discard. Strain 
the stock through a fine sieve into a large bowl. Let 
cool completely. Cover with plastic wrap; refrigerate 
until the fat has risen to surface. Skim off fat before 
using. 
pureed spinach-potato soup 

SERVES 4 

2 tablespoons unsalted butter 

1 onion, cut into   pieces 
3 garlic cloves, minced 


11/2 pounds (about 5 small) Yukon Gold 
potatoes, peeled and cut into   
pieces 

1/4 cup dry sherry or white wine 

1 quart homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken broth 


2 bunches (about 11/4 pounds) spinach, 
tough stems removed, leaves rinsed well 
and dried 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1. Melt the butter in a large saucepan over medium 
heat. Add the onion, garlic, and potatoes; stir to coat. 
Cook, stirring, 2 minutes. 
2. Pour the sherry, broth, and 2 cups water into the 
pan; stir to combine. Bring to a boil. Reduce heat to 
medium-low; cover, and simmer until the potatoes 
are very tender, about 15 minutes. 
3. Stir the spinach into the pan, and cook until 
wilted and bright green, about 3 minutes. Remove 
from heat. Puree the soup with an immersion 
blender until smooth. (Alternatively, use a regular 
blender, working in batches so as not to fill the jar 
more than halfway. Return the mixture to the 
saucepan.) Season with salt and pepper, and serve. 
126 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


stracciatella 

SERVES 4 TO 6 

6 cups homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock 


4 large eggs, lightly beaten 

2 tablespoons fresh flat-leaf parsley, 
roughly chopped, plus more for garnish 


2 tablespoons freshly grated Parmesan 
cheese, plus more for garnish 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1. In a large saucepan, bring the stock to a boil over 
medium-high heat. Reduce heat to low; keep at a 
gentle simmer. 
2. In a medium bowl, whisk together the eggs and 
parsley. Using a fork, stir the stock in a quick circular 
motion, creating a whirlpool; pour in the egg 
mixture in a steady stream. Sprinkle in the cheese; 
season with salt and pepper. Ladle into bowls; garnish 
with parsley and cheese. 
buttermilk vichyssoise 
with watercress 

SERVES 6 

This chilled soup is traditionally garnished with 
fresh chives. We added the peppery snap of watercress 
and the tang of buttermilk to give it bite. 

3 tablespoons unsalted butter 

4 leeks, white and light green parts only, 
halved lengthwise and then thinly sliced 
into half-moons, washed well and drained 

3 large white potatoes, peeled and cut into 
  pieces 


41/2 cups homemade or low-sodium store-
bought chicken stock 

3 cups cleaned watercress leaves, loosely 
packed 


Coarse salt and freshly ground white 

pepper 

1 cup half-and-half 

1 cup buttermilk 

1. Melt the butter in a stockpot over medium-low 
heat. Add the leeks, and cook, covered, until tender, 
about 15 minutes. 
2. Add the potatoes, stock, and 2 cups water. Bring 
to a boil; simmer until the potatoes are tender, about 
20 minutes. Cool completely; stir in 2 cups of the 
watercress. 
3. Working in batches, puree the soup in a blender 
until smooth. Transfer the pureed soup to a large 
bowl. Season with salt and white pepper. Stir in the 
half-and-half; chill at least 1 hour. Add the buttermilk 
just before serving. Adjust seasoning; if necessary, 
thin the soup with a bit more chicken stock 
or water to achieve the desired consistency. Garnish 
with the remaining cup watercress leaves. 
french lentil soup 

SERVES 8 TO 10 

You can easily double this recipe and refrigerate 
leftovers in airtight containers for up to 3 days. 
The soup can also be frozen for up to 3 months. 
We used French lentils, but other types of lentils 
may also be used. 

2 tablespoons olive oil 
1 small onion, finely chopped 


2 carrots, finely chopped 
1 stalk celery, finely chopped 


1 small red bell pepper, seeds and ribs 
removed, finely chopped 


1 teaspoon dried oregano 

1/2 cup French green lentils, rinsed and 
drained 


3 tablespoons bulghur wheat 

11/2 quarts Wild Mushroom Stock 
(recipe follows) 

Coarse salt and freshly ground 
black pepper 


1. Place a large saucepan over medium heat, and 
add the oil. Add the onion, and cook until translucent, 
about 5 minutes, stirring occasionally. Stir in 
the carrots, celery, bell pepper, and oregano until 
combined. Stir in the lentils and bulghur wheat. 
2. Add the stock to the pot; cover, and simmer over 
low heat just until the lentils are tender, about 45 
minutes. Remove from heat; season with salt and 
pepper. Serve hot. 
SOUPS AND STEWS 127 


wild mushroom stock 

MAKES 3 QUARTS 

4 cups plus 31/2 quarts water 

4 ounces dried porcini mushrooms 
2 tablespoons unsalted butter 


2 tablespoons olive oil 
1 large onion, coarsely chopped 


2 large carrots, coarsely chopped 
2 parsnips, coarsely chopped 


2 stalks celery, coarsely chopped 

1 bunch (about 11/2 pounds) red or green 
Swiss chard, cut into   pieces 


1 dried bay leaf 
Several sprigs thyme 


Several sprigs flat-leaf parsley 

1. Bring 4 cups water to a boil. Place the dried mushrooms 
in a medium heatproof bowl; pour the boiling 
water over the mushrooms. Let stand until 
softened, about 20 minutes. Strain through a fine 
sieve into another bowl, reserving the liquid and 
mushrooms separately. Set aside. 
2. In a medium stockpot, heat the butter and oil 
over medium heat. Add the onion, and cook until 
caramelized, about 20 minutes, stirring occasionally. 
Add the reserved mushrooms along with the 
carrots, parsnips, and celery; cook, stirring often, 
until the vegetables are softened and fragrant, 
about 20 minutes. 
3. Stir the Swiss chard into the vegetable mixture 
in the pot. Add 31/2 quarts cold water, reserved 
mushroom liquid (being careful to leave behind 
any sediment), bay leaf, thyme, and parsley. Cover 
the pot, and bring to a boil; reduce heat, and simmer, 
uncovered, about 1 hour. 
4. Remove the pot from the heat, and strain the mixture 
through a fine sieve or cheesecloth-lined colander 
into a large heatproof bowl or saucepan, 
pressing down on the vegetables with the back of 
a wooden spoon to extract as much liquid as possible. 
Discard the solids. Store the stock in airtight 
containers in the refrigerator up to 3 days or in the 
freezer up to 6 months. 
hearty beef stew 

SERVES 10 

This recipe uses the shredded meat and tomato 
pieces left over from making the beef stock 
(recipe follows). Serve over egg noodles or rice. 

Basic Beef Stock (recipe follows) 

1 pound pearl onions, peeled 
5 medium carrots, cut into matchsticks 


1/2 small bunch fresh dill, roughly chopped 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


1 10-ounce package frozen green peas, 
thawed 


1. In a stockpot, combine the stock and reserved 
beef and tomato pieces. Cover; bring to a simmer 
over medium-high heat. Add the onions, carrots, 
and dill. Cook, uncovered, until the onions are soft, 
about 30 minutes. Season with salt and pepper. 
2. When ready to serve, add the peas, and cook just 
until tender and heated through, about 3 minutes. 
Serve hot. 
basic beef stock 

MAKES 31/2 QUARTS 

Reserve the shredded beef and tomato pieces to 
make Hearty Beef Stew (recipe above). Refrigerate 
the stock in airtight containers for up to 30 
days or freeze for up to 6 months. 

6 pounds beef short ribs, trimmed of 
excess fat 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

3 quarts plus 1 cup water 

1 28-ounce can peeled whole tomatoes, 
roughly chopped, juice reserved 


2 dried bay leaves 
10 whole black peppercorns 


1/2 small bunch fresh dill, roughly chopped 

1. Preheat the oven to 450 degrees F. Arrange the ribs in a 
large roasting pan; sprinkle generously with salt 
and pepper. Roast 11/2 hours, turning the ribs 
halfway through. 
128 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


2. Combine 3 quarts water and the tomatoes and 
their juice in a stockpot. Bundle the bay leaves, peppercorns, 
and dill in a small piece of cheesecloth; 
tie with kitchen twine, and add to the pot. 
3. Transfer the roasted ribs to the pot. Pour off and 
discard the fat from the roasting pan. Pour the remaining 
cup water into the pan, and place over 
medium-high heat. Bring to a boil, stirring with a 
wooden spoon to scrape up any browned bits from 
the bottom, until the liquid is reduced by half. 
Transfer the liquid and bits to the stockpot. 
4. Cover the pot; bring the mixture to a simmer over 
high heat, but do not boil. Reduce heat to a gentle 
simmer, and place a smaller pot lid directly on surface 
of stock to keep ingredients submerged; cook 
until the meat is very tender and pulls away from 
the bone, about 11/2 hours. Skim the surface with a 
spoon as needed. 
5. Prepare an ice-water bath. Remove the herb bundle 
from the pot, squeezing out the liquid into the 
pot, and discard. Strain the stock through a sieve 
into a large heatproof bowl set in the ice-water bath. 
Stir frequently until the stock is room temperature. 
6. Transfer the ribs and tomato pieces to another 
bowl. When cool enough to handle, pull the rib meat 
from the bones, and shred it with your fingers. Discard 
the bones. Store the meat and tomato pieces in 
an airtight container in the refrigerator, up to 3 days. 
7. Transfer the cooled stock to airtight containers; 
refrigerate at least 6 hours or overnight. With a 
large metal spoon, skim off and discard fat layer 
that has collected on the top. If storing, leave fat 
layer intact (it helps seal in flavor). 
shredded chicken 
and soba noodle soup 

SERVES 10 

Look for soba noodles in the Asian section of 
your supermarket. 

21/2 quarts Basic Chicken Stock 
(recipe follows) 

2 whole skinless chicken breasts, halved 

Coarse salt 
1/2 pound soba noodles 


1 pound firm or extra-firm tofu, cut 
into   dice 


Freshly ground pepper 

2 small carrots, julienned 
2 red radishes, trimmed and julienned 


1/2 bunch watercress, tough stems removed, 
for garnish 


1. In a medium stockpot, bring the chicken stock 
to a simmer over medium heat. Add the chicken 
breasts; return to a simmer. Reduce heat; simmer 
until the chicken is cooked through, about 20 minutes. 
Transfer the chicken to a plate, and set aside 
until cool enough to handle. Cover, and keep the 
stock at a low simmer. 
2. Meanwhile, bring a medium saucepan of water 
to a boil over high heat. Add salt, and stir in the soba 
noodles. Cook until the soba is al dente, according 
to package instructions. Drain; set aside. 
3. Remove the chicken meat from the bones, and 
shred it into bite-size pieces. Add the tofu to the 
simmering stock just until heated through. Season 
with salt and pepper. 
4. To serve, ladle the stock and tofu into soup bowls. 
Add shredded chicken to each bowl, and mound 
soba noodles in the center. Sprinkle with the carrots 
and radishes; garnish with watercress. 
SOUPS AND STEWS 129 


basic chicken stock 

MAKES ABOUT 5 QUARTS 

Refrigerate the stock in airtight containers for up 
to 3 days or freeze for up to 6 months. We added 
canned broth to fortify the stock's flavor, but you 
can replace it with water, if you prefer. 

3 carrots, cut into thirds 

2 stalks celery, cut into thirds 
1 bulb fennel, cut into large chunks 


3 tablespoons fennel seeds, toasted 
1 teaspoon whole black peppercorns 


1 whole chicken (4 to 6 pounds) 
2 pounds chicken wings, necks, and backs 


3 quarts homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken broth 


2 quarts cold water 

1. In a large stockpot, combine all the ingredients. 
Cover, and bring to a boil over medium-high heat; 
reduce heat to a very gentle simmer. Cook, uncovered, 
1 hour, checking occasionally to make sure the 
liquid is barely bubbling, and skim the surface with 
a large metal spoon as needed. 
2. Transfer the whole chicken to a cutting board. Let 
cool slightly, and pull the meat from the sides. (Reserve 
the meat for another use; store in the refrigerator 
up to 3 days, covered well with plastic wrap.) 
3. Return the chicken bones to the pot. Place a 
smaller pot lid on the surface of the stock to keep 
the solids submerged. Simmer until the bones fall 
apart when poked, 21/2 to 4 hours. Skim the surface 
as needed. 
4. Prepare a large ice-water bath. Strain the stock 
through a fine sieve into a large heatproof bowl, discarding 
the solids. Set the bowl in the ice-water 
bath, and let the stock cool to room temperature, 
stirring frequently. 
5. Transfer the stock to airtight containers. Refrigerate 
at least 8 hours or overnight. With a large 
metal spoon, skim off and discard the fat layer that 
has collected on the top. If storing, leave the fat layer 
intact (it helps to seal in flavor). 
coconut fish chowder 

SERVES 6 

1 tablespoon unsalted butter 

1 small onion, cut into very thin wedges 

2 garlic cloves, finely chopped 

4 fresh or frozen kaffir lime leaves 

2 cups homemade or frozen fish stock 

6 ounces baby potatoes

2 stalks celery, thinly sliced on the bias 

1/4 pound green beans, stem ends trimmed, 
cut into 1  lengths 


1   piece fresh ginger, peeled and 
finely julienned (about 2 tablespoons) 


3 cups unsweetened coconut milk 

1 pound cod fillets, cut into large chunks 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


1/2 bunch fresh chives, cut into 1  
lengths, for garnish 


6 tablespoons freshly grated or desiccated 
coconut, for garnish 


1. Heat the butter in a large saucepan or small stockpot 
over medium heat. Add the onion, and cook, 
stirring occasionally, until translucent, 3 to 4 minutes. 
Add the garlic and lime leaves; cook 1 minute. 
Add the fish stock, potatoes, celery, green beans, 
and ginger; bring to a simmer over medium heat. 
Cook 7 to 9 minutes. 
2. Reduce heat to low. Add the coconut milk, and 
bring almost to a simmer. Add the fish; without stirring, 
simmer until the fish is opaque and the vegetables 
are tender, about 5 minutes. Season with 
salt and pepper. Ladle the soup into bowls; garnish 
with chives and coconut. Serve immediately. 
130 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


spiced red lentil soup 
with crispy fried ginger 

SERVES 6 

After it has finished cooking, this soup will continue 
to thicken; thin it with hot chicken stock or 
water, if desired. 

for the red lentil soup 

1 tablespoon olive oil 
1 Spanish onion, cut into   dice 


4 garlic cloves, minced 
3 tablespoons minced fresh ginger 
(  piece) 
1 teaspoon ground cumin 


1/2 teaspoon curry powder 
2 plum tomatoes, cut into   dice 


2 cups red lentils, picked over and rinsed 

4 cups homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock 


4 cups water 
1 dried bay leaf 


1 teaspoon coarse salt 
Freshly ground pepper 


1/2 cup plain low-fat yogurt, for serving 

for the crispy fried ginger 

2 teaspoons canola or peanut oil 

1 piece (about 5 inches) fresh ginger, 
peeled and cut into very thin strips 
(about 2 inches long) 


1. In a large, heavy-bottomed pot, heat the oil over 
medium-high heat. Add the onion, garlic, ginger, 
cumin, and curry powder; cook, scraping any 
browned bits from the bottom of pot with a wooden 
spoon, until the onion is soft and light golden, about 
10 minutes. Reduce heat to medium, and add the 
tomatoes. Cook about 5 minutes. 
2. Stir the lentils, chicken stock, water, and bay leaf 
into the pot; raise heat to medium-high, and bring 
to a simmer. Reduce heat to low; cook, stirring occasionally, 
until the lentils are tender, about 30 minutes. 
Add the salt; season with pepper. Remove from 
heat. Let stand about 10 minutes. 
3. Meanwhile, make the fried ginger: In a medium 
saute pan, heat the oil over medium heat. Add the 
ginger in a single layer; cook, stirring constantly, 
until the strips begin to turn crisp and deep golden, 
about 4 minutes. Using a slotted spoon or tongs, 
transfer to paper towels to drain. Keep warm until 
ready to serve. 
4. Remove the bay leaf from the pot, and discard. 
Using an immersion or regular blender (working 
in batches so as not to fill the jar more than 
halfway), puree the soup until completely smooth. 
Return the soup to low heat until warmed through. 
Divide the soup among 6 serving bowls; top each 
bowl with about 1 tablespoon yogurt. Garnish with 
fried ginger; serve. 
udon noodles with shiitake 
mushrooms in ginger broth 

SERVES 4 

This recipe will serve four as a first course or 
light lunch. To serve the noodles as a meal, add a 
few cups of diced firm tofu or cooked chicken 
breast to the simmering broth in step 3. 

8 ounces Japanese udon or soba noodles 
2 teaspoons sesame oil 


2 teaspoons vegetable oil 
11/2 tablespoons minced fresh ginger 
(1  piece) 
2 shallots, very thinly sliced 

1/4 pound (about 12) shiitake mushrooms, 
stemmed, caps wiped clean and 
quartered 


2 cups homemade or low-sodium 
store-bought chicken stock 


1 teaspoon rice-wine vinegar 

2 teaspoons low-sodium soy sauce 

3 cups (about 3 ounces) spinach, tough 
stems discarded, rinsed well, drained, and 
cut into  -wide strips 

4 scallions, thinly sliced diagonally 
into   pieces 


SOUPS AND STEWS 131 


1. Bring a large pot of water to a boil. Add the noodles, 
and cook until al dente, according to package 
instructions, about 8 minutes. Drain in a 
colander, toss with the sesame oil, and return to the 
pot. Keep warm. 
2. Meanwhile, in a medium saute pan, heat the vegetable 
oil over medium heat. Add the ginger, shallots, 
and mushrooms; cook, stirring constantly, until 
the mixture begins to soften and turn golden brown, 
about 2 minutes. 
3. Stir the chicken stock, vinegar, and soy sauce into 
the pan, and bring to a simmer. Cook until the 
mushrooms are very tender, about 5 minutes. Add 
the spinach and scallions, and stir to combine. 
4. To serve, divide the noodles among 4 shallow 
bowls; ladle the soup over the noodles. 










clam and corn chowder 

SERVES 8 TO 10 

6 ears corn, shucked 
2 Spanish onions 


1 large carrot, cut into large pieces 
3 stalks celery, cut into large pieces 


1 teaspoon whole black peppercorns 
1 dried bay leaf 


4 sprigs thyme 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


1 cup dry white wine 
4 pounds littleneck clams, scrubbed 


2 tablespoons unsalted butter 

11/4 pounds small red potatoes, cut into 
chunks 

3/4 cup heavy cream 
2 tablespoons chopped fresh chives 

1 tablespoon chopped and seeded 
jalapeno pepper 


1. Make the stock: Cut the corn kernels from the 
cobs; set aside. Slice 1 of the onions, unpeeled, into 
8 wedges. In a stockpot, combine the cobs, onion 
wedges, carrot, celery, peppercorns, bay leaf, and 
thyme. Add 2 quarts water; bring to a boil. Reduce 
heat to a simmer, and cook 1 hour. Season with salt 
and pepper. Strain; discard the solids. The stock can 
be refrigerated up to 1 week. 

2. In a large, wide saucepan, bring the wine to a simmer. 
Add the clams. Cover; steam until the clams 
open, 5 to 7 minutes. Discard any unopened clams. 
Drain in a sieve set over a bowl; reserve and chill 
the liquid. Shuck the clams; halve large ones. Refrigerate, 
submerged in a bit of reserved liquid. 
3. Finely dice the remaining onion. In a large stockpot 
set over medium heat, melt the butter. Add the 
diced onion; cook, stirring, until translucent, about 
6 minutes. Add the potatoes and reserved corn kernels; 
cook 3 to 4 minutes. 
4. Add 31/2 cups reserved stock and 1 cup reserved 
clam liquid to the pot, leaving behind any sediment. 
Bring to a boil; reduce to a simmer. Cook until the 
potatoes are tender, about 25 minutes. Stir in the 
cream, and remove from heat. Puree 2 cups; return 
to the pot, and stir. (Cooled chowder can be refrigerated, 
covered, overnight.) 
5. Add the chives, jalapeno, and reserved clams to 
the pot. Adjust the seasoning; serve. 
roasted vegetable soup 

SERVES 8 TO 10 

2 medium eggplants (about 2 pounds) 

2 red onions, each cut into 8 wedges 

2 tablespoons olive oil 

Coarse salt and freshly ground 

black pepper 

21/2 pounds ripe plum tomatoes 

6 large garlic cloves 

3 large red bell peppers (about 2 pounds) 

1 quart homemade or low-sodium 
store-bought chicken stock 


2 cups lightly packed fresh basil 
leaves (about 1 large bunch), plus 
more for garnish 


1 sprig marjoram 

1 large piece (3 by 4 inches) Parmesan 
rind (from a 3-ounce piece), plus grated 
Parmesan for garnish 


1 15-ounce can chickpeas, drained 
and rinsed 


132 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


1. Preheat the oven to 425 degrees F. Prick the eggplants, 
and place them in a baking pan with the onions; 
toss with the oil. Season with salt and pepper. Roast 
in the upper third of the oven, turning once, until 
the eggplants are soft and the onions browned, 
about 11/4 hours. Let cool. 
2. Meanwhile, season the tomatoes with salt and 
pepper; place in a baking pan with the garlic. Roast 
on the lower rack of the oven until the tomatoes are 
soft and juicy, about 30 minutes. Let cool. 
3. Roast the peppers over a gas burner or on a baking 
sheet under the broiler until blackened, turning 
as each side chars. Transfer to a bowl; cover with 
plastic wrap. Let steam 20 minutes. Using paper towels, 
rub off the skins; remove the stems and seeds. 
4. Remove the stems and skins from the eggplants. 
Coarsely chop the flesh; place in a stockpot. Add 
the roasted vegetables and any accumulated juices 
from the baking sheets. Add the stock, 11/2 cups 
basil, marjoram, cheese rind, and chickpeas; bring 
to a boil over medium-high heat. Reduce heat; simmer, 
partially covered, until the vegetables are very 
tender, about 11/2 hours. 
5. Discard the rind; pass the soup through a food 
mill, discarding the solids. Thin with water if 
needed. Finely chop the remaining 1/2 cup basil; stir 
into the soup. Season with salt and pepper. Garnish 
with cheese and basil. 
mushroom and wild rice soup 

SERVES 8 TO 10 

1 ounce dried porcini mushrooms 

1/2 teaspoon coarse salt, plus more for 
seasoning 


1/2 cup wild rice 

1 tablespoon olive oil 

11/4 pounds assorted mushrooms, such as 
button, cremini, shiitake (stems removed), 
and chanterelle, sliced into bite-size pieces 

Freshly ground pepper 

1 tablespoon unsalted butter 

3 leeks (white and pale-green parts only), 
quartered lengthwise and thinly sliced 


1/2 cup sherry or Madeira 

3 tablespoons soy sauce 

6 cups homemade or low-sodium 
store-bought chicken stock 


2 tablespoons heavy cream 

1 tablespoon finely chopped fresh 
flat-leaf parsley 


1. In a spice mill or coffee grinder, pulse the porcini 
to a fine powder. Set aside. 
2. In a small saucepan, bring 1 cup water to a boil. 
Add the salt and wild rice. Cover; reduce heat to 
medium-low. Cook until tender, 45 to 50 minutes. 
Drain; set aside. 
3. In a large saucepan, heat half the oil over 
medium-high heat. Add half the mushrooms; season 
with salt and pepper. Cook until browned and 
tender, about 7 minutes; transfer to a bowl. Repeat 
with the remaining oil and mushrooms. 
4. Reduce heat to medium-low. Melt the butter; add 
the leeks. Cook, stirring, until softened, about 5 minutes. 
Stir in the mushroom powder; cook 1 minute. 
Add the sherry and soy sauce; cook 1 minute more. 
5. Add the stock to the pot; bring to a boil over 
medium-high heat. Add the mushrooms; return to 
a boil. Reduce heat to medium; cook 20 minutes. 
Stir in the wild rice, cream, and parsley; adjust seasoning, 
and serve. 
SOUPS AND STEWS 133 


porcini and white bean stew 

SERVES 4 

13/4 cups homemade or low-sodium 
store-bought chicken stock 

3/4 ounce dried porcini mushrooms 
1 tablespoon olive oil 


1 small onion, thinly sliced 
2 garlic cloves, thinly sliced 


1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 


4 ounces fresh white mushrooms, quartered 

3 small tomatoes (about 1 pound), 
coarsely chopped 


1 small sprig fresh rosemary, plus 
more for garnish 


1 19-ounce can white beans, drained 
and rinsed 


1. Bring the stock and 1/2 cup water to a boil in a 
small pan. Add the porcini. Let stand until soft, 
about 20 minutes. Remove the porcini with a slotted 
spoon; coarsely chop. Set aside. Strain the soaking 
liquid through cheesecloth; set aside. 
2. Heat the oil in a medium pan over medium-high 
heat. Add the onion, garlic, salt, and pepper. Cook, 
stirring occasionally, until the onion is translucent, 
about 3 minutes. Add the white mushrooms; cook, 
stirring occasionally, until tender, about 5 minutes. 
Stir in the porcini, tomatoes, rosemary, soaking liquid, 
and beans. Bring to a boil. Reduce heat to 
medium; simmer until cooked through, about 15 
minutes. Remove the cooked rosemary; discard. 
Garnish with fresh rosemary sprigs. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 251 CALORIES, 5 G FAT, 

0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 40 G CARBOHYDRATE, 352 MG 

SODIUM, 13 G PROTEIN, 8 G FIBER 

white bean chili 
with herbed yogurt cheese 


SERVES 6 

3 cups dried navy or other white beans 

2 small poblano chiles 
1 tablespoon unsalted butter 


4 cloves garlic, minced 
1 onion, cut into   dice 


1 large carrot, cut into   dice 
2 stalks celery, cut into   dice 


1 teaspoon ground cumin 
1 teaspoon ground coriander 


1/2 teaspoon paprika 
1/4 teaspoon cayenne pepper (optional) 


30 ounces homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock, skimmed of fat 


8 cups water 

11/2 teaspoons coarse salt 
1/4 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper 

4 radishes, grated 
Cilantro sprigs, for garnish 


Herbed Yogurt Cheese (recipe follows) 

1. Pick over the dried beans, discarding any stones 
or broken beans; rinse. Place in a large saucepan, 
cover with cold water by 2 inches, and bring to a 
strong boil over high heat. Cover, and remove from 
heat; let stand 1 hour. Drain the beans; set aside. 
2. Meanwhile, place the peppers directly on a gas 
burner over high heat or on a grill. As they turn 
black, turn with tongs. (Alternatively, place the peppers 
on a baking pan; broil in the oven, turning as 
the peppers become charred.) Transfer the charred 
peppers to a medium bowl; cover with plastic wrap. 
Let the peppers rest 15 minutes. Transfer to a work 
surface (do not rinse). Peel off the blackened skin; 
discard. Halve the peppers; remove the seeds and 
ribs and discard. Cut the peppers into   
pieces; set aside. 
134 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


3. Heat the butter in a large saucepan over medium 
heat. Add the garlic, onion, carrot, and celery. Cover; 
cook, stirring occasionally, until softened and 
slightly browned, about 15 minutes. Add the cumin, 
coriander, paprika, and cayenne, if using; stir to 
combine. Stir in the stock, water, beans, and half the 
roasted poblano chiles. Cover; cook until the beans 
are soft, about 11/2 hours. Uncover; simmer gently 
until the beans begin to fall apart, about 30 minutes 
more. Season with salt and pepper. Serve the 
chili garnished with the remaining poblano chiles, 
radish, cilantro, and yogurt cheese, if desired. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER CHILI SERVING: 369 CALORIES, 
169 MG CALCIUM, 4 G FAT, 6 MG CHOLESTEROL, 572 MG 
SODIUM, 22 G PROTEIN, 11 G FIBER 

herbed yogurt cheese 

MAKES ABOUT 1 CUP 

1 8-ounce container plain fat-free yogurt 

2 teaspoons fresh lime juice 

1/4 cup chopped fresh cilantro 

1/4 cup chopped fresh flat-leaf parsley 

1/4 teaspoon coarse salt 

Pinch of freshly ground pepper 

Line a colander or strainer with several thicknesses 
of cheesecloth; set over a bowl. Add the yogurt; 
drain for 1 hour. Transfer the yogurt to bowl of food 
processor; add the lime juice, cilantro, parsley, salt, 
and pepper. Puree until well combined. Chill until 
ready to use, up to 1 week. 

FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 8 CALORIES, 29 MG 
CALCIUM, 0 G FAT, 0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 29 MG SODIUM, 1 G 
PROTEIN, 0 G FIBER 

cock-a-leekie 

SERVES 6 

This traditional Scottish soup is made with 
chicken stock, leeks, and potatoes. If you make 
this soup ahead, you may need to add a bit of 
water or stock when reheating it. 

11/4 pounds skinless chicken thighs (on the 
bone; 4 pieces) 

11/4 pounds skinless chicken breast halves 
(on the bone; 3 pieces) 

4 141/2-ounce cans low-sodium chicken 
broth, skimmed of fat 


2 cups white wine or water 
2 large celery ribs, halved crosswise 


1 large carrot, peeled 
2 large garlic cloves, peeled 


6 leeks, white and light-green parts only, 
halved lengthwise, thinly sliced crosswise 


12 pitted prunes, quartered (2/3 cup packed) 

1/2 cup barley 
1/2 cup finely chopped fresh flat-leaf parsley 


1. Heat a 6-quart Dutch oven on medium-high until 
hot. Add the thighs; cook until browned, turning 
once, about 8 minutes. Transfer to a bowl. Repeat 
with the breasts. 
2. Add the broth, wine, celery, carrot, and garlic to 
the Dutch oven. Bring to a boil; scrape any browned 
bits from the pot. Return the chicken to the pot, reduce 
heat, and simmer, skimming as necessary, for 
1 hour. Transfer the chicken to a plate; let cool. 
Transfer the vegetables to another plate; reserve. 
3. Add the leeks, prunes, and barley to the broth. 
Bring to a boil, reduce heat, and simmer until thick, 
about 40 minutes more. Once the chicken has 
cooled, shred the meat. Finely dice the carrot and 
celery. Stir the chicken, carrot, celery, and parsley 
into the soup, heat through, and serve. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 416 CALORIES, 5 G FAT, 

132 MG CHOLESTEROL, 32 G CARBOHYDRATE, 754 MG 

SODIUM, 43 G PROTEIN, 5 G FIBER 

SOUPS AND STEWS 135 


lamb stew with 
jerusalem artichokes 

SERVES 6 

3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

11/2 pounds boneless lamb shoulder

Coarse salt and freshly ground black 

pepper 

11/2 pounds Jerusalem artichokes (about 15small), peeled, cut into   cubes, and 
reserved in cold water (drain and pat dry 
before using) 

2 cups coarsely chopped onion 
(about 1 large) 


2 garlic cloves, minced (about 1 tablespoon) 

1 tablespoon freshly grated ginger 
(  piece) 


1 whole cinnamon stick 

2 whole cloves 

2 green cardamom pods, lightly crushed 

1/2 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes 

1 35-ounce can whole peeled plum tomatoes 
with juice 

1 cup homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock 


1/8 teaspoon crumbled saffron threads 

1 10-ounce jar small caperberries, drained 
1/4 cup finely chopped fresh cilantro 


1. Heat 2 tablespoons of the oil in a large, heavy pot 
over medium-high heat. Season the lamb with salt 
and black pepper; brown the meat (in batches, if 
necessary) on all sides, about 8 minutes. Transfer 
to a bowl. 
2. Cook the artichokes in the remaining tablespoon 
oil in the same pot over medium-high heat, stirring 
occasionally, until well browned on all sides, about 
7 minutes. Using a slotted spoon, transfer the artichokes 
to a separate bowl. 
3. Add the onion, garlic, and ginger to the remaining 
oil in the pot; saute over medium-high heat, stirring 
occasionally, until the onion is translucent, 
about 4 minutes. Add the cinnamon, cloves, cardamom, 
and red pepper flakes; cook, stirring constantly, 
2 minutes. 
4. Stir in the tomatoes and juice, stock, saffron, and 
1 teaspoon salt. Using the side of a wooden spoon, 
break up the tomatoes. Add the reserved lamb; bring 
the mixture to a boil. Reduce heat to low; cover, and 
simmer until the meat is tender, about 1 hour. 
5. Return the reserved artichokes to the pot. Continue 
to simmer until the artichokes are tender, 
about 25 minutes; add the caperberries during the 
final 5 minutes of cooking. Season with salt and 
black pepper; stir in the cilantro. Discard the cinnamon, 
cloves, and cardamom before serving. 
cilantro gazpacho 

MAKES 2 QUARTS; SERVES 12 

Martha served this gazpacho over tomato aspic 
in a glass as a portable first course, but the gazpacho 
can also be served on its own. 

5 pounds ripe tomatoes, seeds removed 

21/2 pounds cucumber, peeled, seeds removed 
2 red bell peppers, seeds removed 
1 jalapeno pepper, seeds removed 
4 scallions, white and light-green parts only 
1 large garlic clove, peeled 

1/2 cup extra-virgin olive oil 

3/4 cup fresh cilantro, roughly chopped 
Juice of 2 limes (5 tablespoons) 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
Hot pepper sauce 
Tomato Aspic (recipe follows) 
Big Croutons (recipe follows) 
1. Roughly chop the tomatoes, cucumber, red and 
jalapeno peppers, scallions, and garlic. Place in a 
large bowl; toss with 1/4 cup olive oil, 1/2 cup cilantro, 
and the lime juice. In a food processor or blender, 
puree half the vegetables until smooth. With the 
motor running, slowly add the remaining olive oil 
136 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


to the puree in a steady stream until the mixture 
emulsifies. Pass the puree through a fine-mesh 
strainer into a medium bowl, and set aside. Discard 
the pulp in the strainer. 

2. In a food processor or blender, pulse the remaining 
vegetables in batches, letting them remain 
chunky. Alternatively, chop the vegetables by hand. 
Combine the mixture with the reserved puree; mix 
well. Stir in the remaining cilantro. Season with salt, 
pepper, and hot pepper sauce to taste. 
3. Pour 1/4 cup aspic into 12 6-ounce glasses; chill 
until set, at least 1 hour. Ladle 1/2 cup gazpacho into 
each glass, and serve garnished with a big crouton. 
tomato aspic 

MAKES 3 CUPS 

4 pounds ripe tomatoes, seeds removed 
1 jalapeno pepper, seeds removed 


11/2 teaspoons coarse salt 
1/2 cup water 

6 packets powdered gelatin (1/4 cup plus 
2 teaspoons) 


1. In a food processor or blender, puree the tomatoes 
and jalapeno until smooth. Line a large bowl 
with a double layer of cheesecloth. Transfer the 
puree to the prepared bowl. With kitchen twine, tie 
the cheesecloth to enclose the tomato puree; tie the 
bundle to a large wooden spoon. Rest the spoon 
across the top of a stockpot or deep jar, letting the 
juices drip into the pot for about 3 hours. Pour the 
tomato water through a fine chinois or sieve into a 
bowl. Add salt; stir to combine. 
2. Place 1/2 cup cold water in a small heatproof bowl. 
Sprinkle the gelatin evenly over the water; set aside 
5 minutes to soften. Bring a small saucepan of water 
to a simmer; place the bowl of gelatin over it. Stir 
until the gelatin is dissolved; remove the bowl from 
heat. Stir in some of the tomato water to reduce the 
temperature, then stir all of the gelatin mixture into 
the remaining tomato water. 
big croutons 

MAKES 12 

These can be made a day ahead and stored in an 
airtight container after cooling. 

1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil 

4 tablespoons unsalted butter 

1/4 cup chopped fresh flat-leaf parsley 

1 baguette, cut into  -thick slices 

Combine the olive oil and butter in a small 
saucepan; heat over medium heat until the butter 
is melted. Stir in the parsley. Spread over the bread; 
grill until crisp, 1 to 2 minutes on each side. Alternatively, 
toast the croutons in a 350 degrees F oven until 
golden brown, 10 to 15 minutes. 

chestnut mushroom soup 

SERVES 4 TO 6 

For a velvety smooth texture, pass the soup 
through a fine strainer after the mixture has been 
processed and before adding the cream. 

1 pound fresh chestnuts 

6 ounces cremini mushrooms 

2 ounces shiitake mushrooms, stems 
removed 


2 tablespoons unsalted butter 

1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1 small onion, chopped 

1 clove garlic, halved 

8 sprigs fresh thyme, plus leaves for garnish 

6 cups homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock 


2 cups water 

1/2 cup heavy cream 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Using a chestnut knife 
or a small paring knife, make an incision about 1/8 
inch deep through the shell and into the flesh of 
each chestnut almost all the way around the circumference. 
Transfer to a chestnut pan or rimmed 
baking pan. Roast in the oven until the chestnuts 
are tender, about 35 minutes. Turn the oven off. 
SOUPS AND STEWS 137 


Leaving the pan with the chestnuts in the oven, remove 
several at a time. Working quickly, place 1 
chestnut in a towel, and, holding both, peel the 
chestnut while still hot. Remove and discard the 
shells and inner skin; set aside. 

2. Roughly chop all but 2 cremini and 2 shiitake 
mushrooms. Heat 1 tablespoon of the butter with 
the olive oil in a small stockpot over medium-high 
heat. Add the chopped mushrooms, and season 
with salt and pepper. Cook the mushrooms, stirring 
occasionally, until they start to brown, about 5 minutes. 
Add the onion, garlic, and thyme sprigs. Reduce 
heat to medium-low, and cook until the onions 
are translucent, about 8 minutes. Add all but 4 
chestnuts, and cook until golden, about 5 minutes. 
Add the chicken stock and water, raise heat to high, 
and bring to a boil. Reduce heat, and simmer until 
the chestnuts are falling-apart tender, about 1 hour. 
Remove and discard the thyme sprigs, and let stand 
about 10 minutes. 
3. Let the soup cool slightly. Pass the soup through 
a sieve, and transfer the solids, reserving the liquid, 
to a food processor or blender. Puree, in batches, 
until very smooth. Add the reserved liquid, and 
process for 1 minute. Adjust the seasoning with salt 
and pepper, if necessary. Transfer to the stockpot, 
stir in the cream, and place over low heat until hot. 
4. Cut the 4 reserved chestnuts and the 4 reserved 
mushrooms into  -thick slices. Melt the remaining 
tablespoon butter in a small skillet over 
medium-high heat. Add the chestnuts and mushrooms, 
and cook until crisp and golden brown, 3 
to 4 minutes. Divide the soup among soup bowls, 
and garnish with sauteed chestnuts, mushrooms, 
and thyme leaves. 
poached salmon, leek, 
and fennel soup 

SERVES 6 

3 leeks, white and light-green parts only 

1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil 

3 carrots, peeled and cut into  thick 
slices 


1 small fennel bulb, trimmed and cut into 
wedges, fronds reserved for garnish 


2 celery stalks, cut crosswise into   
slices 


4 sprigs fresh flat-leaf parsley 

4 sprigs fresh thyme 
1 141/2-ounce can fat-free vegetable stock 


2 teaspoons coarse salt 
1/2 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 


1 1-pound salmon fillet, skin removed, 
cut into   cubes 


1 bunch (about 3 ounces) spinach, washed 
and cut into 1 -wide strips 


1. Slice the leeks crosswise into   coins. Place 
in a bowl of cold water; move the leeks with your 
fingers so the sand falls to the bottom. Lift the leeks 
from the water with your fingers or a slotted spoon, 
and drain; set aside. 
2. Heat the oil in a saucepan over medium heat. Add 
the leeks, carrots, fennel, and celery. Cook until softened, 
about 5 minutes. Add the parsley, thyme, 
stock, salt, pepper, and 5 cups water. Bring to a boil; 
reduce to a simmer. Cook 30 minutes. Turn off heat; 
add the salmon and spinach. Poach until just 
cooked through, about 3 minutes. Garnish with fennel 
fronds; serve. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 177 CALORIES, 8 G FAT, 

42 MG CHOLESTEROL, 10 G CARBOHYDRATE, 202 MG 

SODIUM, 17 G PROTEIN, 3 G FIBER 

138 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


summer vegetable pot au feu 

SERVES 4 

2 teaspoons extra-virgin olive oil 

2 ounces pearl onions, peeled 

3 garlic cloves, peeled 

1/4 cup dry white wine 

4 ounces round baby orange and 
yellow carrots, thinly sliced 


1 small bay leaf 

2 sprigs fresh thyme 

2 sprigs fresh flat-leaf parsley 

3/4 cup homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock 
4 ounces baby new potatoes 

9 ounces assorted baby summer squashes, 
cut in half 


1 ounce young sugar snap peas, 
stem ends trimmed 


1 ounce fresh or frozen lima beans, shelled 

1. Heat the oil in a large skillet over medium-high 
heat. Add the onions and garlic; cook until golden. 
Add the white wine; cook until most of it has evaporated, 
about 3 minutes. Add the carrots, bay leaf, 
thyme, parsley, stock, and 3/4 cup water; simmer 5 
minutes. Add the potatoes; simmer 7 minutes. Add 
the squash; cook until just tender, about 5 minutes. 
Add the peas and lima beans, and cook 2 minutes. 
2. Remove the skillet from heat; remove and discard 
the herb sprigs. Divide the vegetables and 
broth among 4 shallow bowls, and serve. 
chicken stew with carrots, 
chickpeas, and raisins 

SERVES 6 

1 tablespoon all-purpose flour 

2 pounds skinless, bone-in chicken thighs 
1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 


1 can (14 ounces) low-sodium chicken broth 
1 cup drained canned chickpeas, rinsed 

3 carrots, peeled and coarsely chopped 
1/2 cup raisins 


1 small onion, chopped 
2 garlic cloves, minced 


2 tablespoons finely chopped peeled 
fresh ginger 


4 to 5 sprigs fresh thyme 

1 tablespoon Dijon mustard 
1 teaspoon finely grated lemon zest 


1 box (5.8 ounces) couscous 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Place the flour in an 
ovenproof bag; shake to coat inside. Place bag in a 
small roasting pan. 
2. Season chicken with the salt, and place in bag. 
Add broth, chickpeas, carrots, raisins, onion, garlic, 
ginger, thyme, mustard, and zest to bag; tie bag 
closed, and shake to combine. Set in pan, and make 
four   slits in bag near opening. Bake chicken 
mixture in bag in the roasting pan until chicken is 
very tender, 1 hour 30 minutes. 
3. While the chicken cooks, prepare the couscous 
according to package instructions, omitting any fat. 
Serve chicken and sauce over couscous. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 381 CALORIES, 10 G FAT, 

76 MG CHOLESTEROL, 46 G CARBOHYDRATE, 473 MG 

SODIUM, 28 G PROTEIN, 5 G FIBER 

SOUPS AND STEWS 139 


spring vegetable stew 
with sweet-potato dumplings 


SERVES 6 

for the dumplings 

1 medium sweet potato (about 12 ounces), 
peeled and cut into large chunks 


Coarse salt 

11/4 cups all-purpose flour 
1/2 teaspoon baking powder 

Freshly ground pepper 
2 large eggs, lightly beaten 


2 tablespoons finely chopped fresh 
flat-leaf parsley 


for the stew 

2 lemons, halved 
4 medium artichokes (10 ounces each) 


3 tablespoons unsalted butter 

10 ounces red pearl onions, blanched and 
peeled 


1 rind Parmesan cheese (about 5 inches 
long; or substitute   piece cheese) 


21/2 cups homemade or low-sodium store-
bought vegetable stock (not roasted) 

1 teaspoon coarse salt 

1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 

12 orange or yellow baby carrots, peeled, or 
3 medium carrots, peeled, halved 
lengthwise, and cut into   pieces 


2 tablespoons finely chopped fresh 
tarragon 


6 ounces asparagus, trimmed and cut into 
  pieces (about 11/4 cups) 


1. Make the dumplings: Place the sweet potato in 
a saucepan; cover with water by 1 inch. Bring to a 
boil; add a large pinch of salt. Reduce the heat; simmer 
until tender, about 15 minutes. Meanwhile, 
whisk the flour, baking powder, 11/2 teaspoons salt, 
and a pinch of pepper in a bowl; set aside. 
2. Drain the sweet potato. Pass it through a ricer 
onto a baking sheet. Spread out; let cool 15 minutes. 
Transfer to a bowl. Stir in the eggs and parsley. Add 
the flour mixture; stir just until a sticky dough forms. 
3. Meanwhile, make the stew: Fill a medium bowl 
with cold water. Squeeze the juice of 11/2 lemons into 
the water; add the rinds. Remove and discard the 
tough outer leaves from 1 artichoke. Cut off the top 
third; peel the stem. Halve the artichoke lengthwise; 
remove the fuzzy choke, and discard. Cut into 
 -thick wedges, and place in the lemon water. 
Repeat with the remaining artichokes. 
4. Melt the butter in a medium stockpot over 
medium heat. Add the onions; cook, stirring occasionally, 
3 minutes. Add the Parmesan rind. Drain 
the artichokes; add to pot. Stir in the stock and 41/2 
cups water; add salt and pepper. Bring to a boil. Add 
the carrots. Reduce the heat; simmer, partially covered, 
10 minutes. Squeeze the remaining 1/2 lemon 
into pot; stir in tarragon. 
5. Using 2 spoons, form 18 dumplings, dropping 
into the stew as you work. Cover; cook 7 minutes. 
Add the asparagus. Cook, covered, until the 
dumplings are cooked through and the vegetables 
are tender, about 3 minutes. Remove the rind before 
serving. 
140 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


potato soup 
with baby artichokes 


SERVES 8 

You can substitute eight small artichokes for the 
baby artichokes: Prepare them as directed below, 
removing all but the tender inner leaves and 
scooping out the choke. Adjust the cooking time 
accordingly. Fan leaves of artichoke hearts, and 
place one in each bowl. 

2 lemons, halved crosswise 

24 baby artichokes 
6 cups homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock 
4 tablespoons unsalted butter 


2 small onions, finely chopped 
Coarse salt 


Freshly ground white pepper 

2 pounds Yukon Gold potatoes, peeled 
and cut into   pieces 


Fresh chives, cut into   pieces, 
for garnish 


1. Fill a large bowl with cold water, and squeeze the 
juice of 3 lemon halves into the water; add the rinds. 
Working with 1 artichoke at a time, remove the 
tough outer leaves (reserve about 8 cups leaves, and 
discard remaining). Trim the tops so the artichokes 
are 1 inch long. Peel the stems to remove tough, 
dark-green parts, and cut the stems flat so that the 
artichokes can stand upright. Rub the artichokes 
with juice from the remaining lemon half; place the 
artichokes in the lemon water. Cover with damp 
paper towels. The artichokes can be refrigerated in 
lemon water overnight; cook just before serving. 
2. Put the reserved artichoke leaves and the stock 
into a large stockpot. Bring to a boil over medium-
high heat. Reduce heat to medium-low, and simmer 
for 10 minutes. Pour through a fine sieve into a large 
bowl, and discard the leaves (you should have about 
4 cups liquid). Set aside. 

3. Melt the butter in a medium stockpot over 
medium-high heat. Add the onions, 1/2 teaspoon salt, 
and 1/4 teaspoon pepper. Cook, stirring occasionally, 
until the onions are translucent, about 4 minutes. 
Add the potatoes and reserved artichoke broth. 
Bring to a boil over medium-high heat. Reduce heat 
to medium-low. Simmer, partially covered, until the 
potatoes are tender when pierced with the tip of a 
knife, 10 to 15 minutes. Let cool slightly. 
4. Meanwhile, fill a clean large stockpot with 2 
inches of water. Insert a steamer basket, and bring 
water to a boil. Add the artichoke hearts to steamer 
basket. Cover, and steam until artichoke hearts are 
tender but not falling apart, 15 to 20 minutes (begin 
checking after 15 minutes). Season with salt. Transfer 
the artichoke hearts to a platter, and cover to 
keep warm. 
5. Working in batches, coarsely puree the soup in 
a food processor (do not overprocess). Pass through 
a medium-mesh sieve into another pot. Season with 
salt and pepper. The soup can be refrigerated in an 
airtight container overnight; reheat over medium-
low heat before serving. 
6. Ladle the soup into bowls. Fan leaves of artichoke 
hearts, if desired; place 3 hearts in each bowl. Garnish 
soup with chives. 
SOUPS AND STEWS 141 


cavolo nero and 
cannellini bean soup 

SERVES 4 

11/2 pounds cavolo nero (also called Tuscan 
kale), stemmed and coarsely chopped 

2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

1/3 cup finely chopped red onion 

3 garlic cloves, thinly sliced 

1 dried red chile, crumbled 

1/2 teaspoon fennel seeds 

4 cups homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock 


8 ounces dried cannellini beans, soaked 
according to package instructions 


1 medium tomato, seeded and finely
chopped (about 3/4 cup) 


1/4 teaspoon coarse salt 

Freshly ground pepper 

1/4 loaf Tuscan bread (about 6 ounces), 
cut into  -thick slices and toasted 


1. Prepare an ice bath; set aside. Bring a large 
saucepan of water to a boil. Add the kale; cook until 
just tender, 3 to 5 minutes. Drain, reserving 1/4 cup 
cooking liquid. Plunge the kale into the ice bath. 
Drain. 
2. Heat the oil in a large saucepan over medium 
heat. Add the onion; cook, stirring occasionally, until 
tender, about 5 minutes. Add the garlic, chile, and 
fennel seeds; cook, stirring occasionally, 2 minutes. 
3. Stir in the stock, beans, and tomato. Bring to a 
boil. Reduce to a simmer, and cook, stirring occasionally, 
until beans are tender, 30 to 40 minutes. 
4. Add the kale and reserved cooking liquid. Season 
with salt and pepper. Cook, stirring, until the 
kale is tender, about 5 minutes. Divide the bread 
and soup among 4 bowls. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 290 CALORIES, 7 G FAT, 

1 MG CHOLESTEROL, 47 G CARBOHYDRATE, 687 MG SODIUM, 

13 G PROTEIN, 4 G FIBER 

thai hot-and-sour chicken soup 
with wide rice sticks 

SERVES 6 

Some varieties of noodles suggest soaking them 
in boiling water instead of cooking them; check 
your package instructions before preparing them. 

7 ounces wide rice sticks 

6 cups homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock 


2 lemongrass stalks, bottom 8 inches only, 
trimmed and crushed 


16 slices (1/4 inch thick each) jarred or 
canned bamboo shoots 


1 piece (11/2 inches) peeled fresh galangal 
or ginger, thickly sliced 


8 fresh or frozen kaffir lime leaves, plus 
more thinly sliced for garnish 


3 tablespoons Asian fish sauce 

Juice of 2 limes 
1 tablespoon palm or granulated sugar 


4 fresh Thai chiles, thinly sliced 

2 boneless, skinless chicken breast halves 
(6 ounces each), cut into  -thick, 
 -long strips 


3 ounces snow peas, trimmed 

3 ounces oyster mushrooms 

1/2 cup chopped (  pieces) Chinese 
yard-long or green beans 


1/4 cup chopped garlic chives or scallions, 
plus more for garnish 


1. Bring a large pot of water to a boil. Add the noodles; 
cook according to package instructions, 6 to 
8 minutes. Drain; rinse under cold running water. 
Set aside. 
2. Bring the stock, lemongrass, bamboo shoots, 
galangal, and 4 lime leaves to a boil in a large pot. 
Reduce the heat; simmer 8 minutes. Stir in half of 
the fish sauce, half of the lime juice, half of the sugar, 
and half of the chiles; cook 4 minutes. 
3. Stir in the chicken, and cook until the chicken is 
cooked through, about 3 minutes. Taste, and add 
more fish sauce, sugar, or chiles as desired. Discard 
the lemongrass and lime leaves. Stir in the snow 
142 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


peas, mushrooms, beans, chives, and remaining 4 
lime leaves. Remove from heat, and stir in remaining 
lime juice. Divide the soup and noodles among 
6 serving bowls; garnish with lime leaves and chives. 

japanese salmon ramen 
with chile-ginger dressing 
and wheat noodles 

SERVES 6 

for the salmon 

11/2 pounds salmon fillet, skinned 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

5 tablespoons store-bought teriyaki 
marinade 


Vegetable oil, for rubbing 

for the dressing 

2 tablespoons black or red-wine vinegar 
1/4 cup sweet chili sauce 


6 tablespoons Asian fish sauce 

1 piece (2 inches) peeled fresh ginger, 
finely grated 


for serving 

1 pound thin wheat noodles or soba noodles 

1 tablespoon plus 1/4 teaspoon instant dashi 
stock powder 

3 scallions, white parts cut into   
pieces, green parts thinly sliced 


11/2 cups tatsoi or baby spinach 
1 tablespoon toasted sesame seeds 

1. Season the salmon with salt and pepper. Transfer 
to a resealable bag. Add the teriyaki marinade; 
gently toss to coat. Refrigerate at least 1 hour (up 
to 4 hours). 
2. Make the dressing: Whisk together the vinegar, 
chili sauce, fish sauce, and ginger in a small bowl; 
set aside. 
3. Bring a large pot of water to a boil. Add the noodles, 
and cook according to package instructions, 
3 to 5 minutes. Drain, and rinse under cold running 
water to stop the cooking. Set aside. 
4. Remove the salmon from the marinade, and rub 
with oil; reserve marinade. Heat a large nonstick 
skillet over medium-high heat until hot. Add the 
salmon; cook, flipping once, until dark brown, about 
3 minutes per side for medium-rare. Add about half 
of the reserved marinade during last minute of 
cooking, and flip salmon to coat. Transfer to a plate. 
Let stand 5 minutes. Flake into large chunks. 
5. Bring 6 cups water to a boil in a large pot. Stir in 
the dashi powder and white part of scallion. Reduce 
to a simmer, and cook 3 minutes. Set aside. 
6. To serve, divide the noodles among 6 serving 
bowls; ladle some dashi broth over noodles. Divide 
the salmon and tatsoi among bowls. Drizzle with 
dressing; sprinkle with sesame seeds and green part 
of scallions. Serve immediately. 
pear and 
autumn-vegetable soup 


SERVES 6 

2 medium Bartlett pears (8 to 10 ounces 
each) and 4 small Bartlett pears (about 
6 ounces each) 


1 sugar pumpkin or butternut squash 
(about 1 pound), peeled and cut into 
  pieces 


1 turnip (about 3 ounces), trimmed, peeled, 
and cut into   pieces 


1 sprig fresh sage 

11/2 teaspoons coarse salt 
1/4 cup heavy cream 

1/2 teaspoon freshly ground white pepper 

1. Preheat the oven to 200 degrees F. Using a mandoline or 
a very sharp knife, cut 2 medium pears lengthwise 
into paper-thin slices. Arrange the slices in a single 
layer on a rimmed baking sheet. Bake until 
pears are dry, about 1 hour. Let cool completely on 
sheet on a wire rack. 
2. Meanwhile, peel the remaining 4 pears; halve 
lengthwise, and core. Place the pears, pumpkin, 
turnip, sage, and 1 teaspoon salt in a 4-quart stockpot. 
Cover with water (at least 4 cups). Bring to a 
boil. Reduce the heat, and simmer until vegetables 
are tender, about 20 minutes. 
SOUPS AND STEWS 143 


3. Pour the mixture through a sieve into a medium 
bowl, reserving the broth and discarding the sage. 
Puree the solids in a food processor or blender, 
adding up to 1/2 cup reserved broth as needed. 
4. Return the puree to the pot. Stir in 3 to 4 cups 
reserved broth to achieve desired consistency. 
Bring the soup to a simmer over medium-low heat. 
Whisk in cream, remaining 1/2 teaspoon salt, and 
the pepper. Serve garnished with dried pears. 
roasted pumpkin 
and mushroom soup 

SERVES 8 

1 sugar pumpkin (about 2 pounds), cut into 
8 wedges (do not remove seeds) 

6 ounces shiitake mushrooms 

4 medium leeks, trimmed and cut crosswise 
into 1  pieces, rinsed well 


3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

Coarse salt 
12 large sprigs fresh thyme 


10 large fresh sage leaves 
6 garlic cloves (do not peel) 


2 shallots, thinly sliced 
6 large sprigs fresh flat-leaf parsley 


1 bay leaf 
Freshly ground pepper 


1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees  F. Place 7 pumpkin 
wedges on a heavy rimmed baking sheet. Peel and 
seed the remaining wedge, and cut into   
cubes; set the cubes aside and add peel and seeds 
to baking sheet. Remove the stems from 2 mushrooms; 
thinly slice the caps, and set the sliced caps 
aside with reserved pumpkin cubes. Add the stems 
and remaining mushrooms to the baking sheet. 
Julienne 2 white pieces of leek, and set aside with 
the reserved pumpkin and mushroom; set aside remaining 
leeks. 

2. Drizzle the pumpkin and mushrooms on baking 
sheet with the oil, and sprinkle with 1/2 teaspoon 
salt; toss to coat. Add the thyme, sage, and garlic to 
sheet, and toss to combine; spread out in a single 
layer. Bake until the pumpkin is lightly browned 
and garlic is soft, 40 to 45 minutes. 
3. Transfer the roasted vegetables to a large stockpot. 
Place the hot baking sheet on a stove burner over 
medium heat, and add 1 cup water, scraping browned 
bits with a wooden spoon. Add the deglazed liquid 
to pot. Add the leeks, shallots, parsley, bay leaf, and 
12 cups water. Bring to a boil. Reduce heat to 
medium-low; simmer, partially covered, 45 minutes. 
Uncover, and raise heat to medium. Cook 15 minutes 
more. Pour through a fine sieve into a medium 
saucepan; discard solids. 
4. Add the reserved julienned leek, pumpkin, and 
mushrooms to the saucepan, and season with salt. 
Bring to a simmer over medium heat; cook until the 
vegetables are tender, about 10 minutes. Season 
with salt and pepper, and serve. 
144 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


salads 



STARTER SALADS 


arugula and cannellini salad 
with olive vinaigrette 

SERVES 4 

This colorful salad can also be served family style 
in a large bowl; toss the arugula in the vinaigrette 
along with the beans and tomatoes, and let everyone 
help himself. Nicoise olives have an appealing 
nuttiness that complements the peppery 
arugula. 

1/2 cup pitted oil-cured olives, such 
as Nicoise (about 36) 


1/4 cup water 
1 garlic clove 


1/2 cup packed fresh basil leaves 
2 teaspoons sherry vinegar 


1/2 teaspoon ground cumin 

1 151/2-ounce can white beans, rinsed 
and drained 


11/2 cups pear, grape, or cherry tomatoes, 
halved 

1/2 red onion, thinly sliced 

1 bunch arugula (about 6 ounces), 
trimmed and washed 


1. Make the vinaigrette: Combine the olives and the 
water in the bowl of a food processor fitted with the 
metal blade. Process until the olives are finely 
chopped. Add the garlic, basil, vinegar, and cumin; 
process until the mixture is smooth and combined, 
stopping to scrape the sides of the bowl with a rubber 
spatula as needed. 
2. In a medium bowl, combine the beans, tomatoes, 
and red onion, and gently toss. Pour the vinaigrette 
over the bean mixture, and toss well to coat. To 
serve, divide the arugula leaves among 4 plates, and 
mound the bean mixture on top. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 210 CALORIES, 13 G FAT, 

0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 18 G CARBOHYDRATE, 442 MG SODIUM, 

5 G PROTEIN, 5 G FIBER 

autumn greens with apples, 
radishes, and cheddar frico 

SERVES 10 TO 12 

Look for pumpkinseed oil in gourmet shops or 
health-food stores. 

2 tablespoons sherry vinegar 

2 teaspoons Dijon mustard 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1/4 cup pumpkinseed oil 

6 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

2 Granny Smith apples 

6 radishes, scrubbed and trimmed 

9 cups mixed greens (about 3/4 pound), 
washed and dried 


Cheddar Frico (recipe follows) 

1. Make the vinaigrette: In a small bowl, whisk together 
the vinegar and mustard; season with salt 
and pepper. Whisking constantly, slowly add the 
pumpkinseed oil and then the olive oil in a steady 
stream until thick and emulsified. 
2. Slice the apples and radishes on the thinnest setting 
of a mandoline or with a sharp knife. Place in 
a serving bowl; add the mixed greens, and toss to 
combine. 
3. Drizzle the vinaigrette over the salad mixture, 
and toss well to coat evenly. Serve immediately with 
Cheddar Frico. 
cheddar frico 

MAKES 26 

Frico, or "little trifles" in Italian, are very thin and 
crisp. When sprinkling the cheese mixture in the 
skillet, don't worry if there are spaces; the cheese 
will melt into a lacy whole. In Italy, frico are traditionally 
made with Montasio cheese, but other 
cheeses, such as Cheddar, Asiago, and Parmesan, 
produce excellent results. 

10 ounces sharp white Cheddar cheese, 
grated (about 5 cups) 


1 tablespoon all-purpose flour 

1. In a medium bowl, toss together the cheese and 
flour. Heat a large nonstick skillet over medium146 
THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


low heat. Sprinkle about 11/2 tablespoons of the 
cheese mixture into the skillet to form a 4-inch round. 

2. Cook until the cheese is starting to melt and become 
firm, 11/2 to 2 minutes. Using a small offset 
spatula, turn; continue cooking until it is firm and 
slightly golden, 15 to 30 seconds more. 
3. Immediately drape the frico over a rolling pin, 
and let cool slightly to set the shape. Repeat with 
the remaining cheese mixture. If the skillet gets too 
hot and the frico begin to color too quickly, remove 
from heat for several minutes before proceeding. 
warm goat cheese with wasabi 
pea crust, peas, and greens 

SERVES 6 AS AN APPETIZER 

Wasabi peas are a popular cocktail snack. In this 
recipe, they are ground and used to encrust goat 
cheese buttons, providing an innovative alternative 
to bread crumbs. For best results, slice the 
goat cheese with a piece of thread. 

2 cups wasabi peas 

1 12-ounce log firm fresh goat cheese 

3/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil 
1/2 tablespoon wasabi paste 
3 tablespoons rice-wine vinegar 


1 tablespoon mayonnaise 
Pinch of sugar 


Coarse salt 

5 ounces sugar snap peas, ends trimmed 
and string removed (about 11/2 cups) 


5 ounces snow peas, trimmed (about 
11/2 cups) 


6 ounces pea shoots 

1. Place 11/2 cups wasabi peas in the bowl of a food 
processor fitted with the metal blade. Process until 
a coarse powder forms; transfer to a large plate. 
2. Slice the goat cheese log into 6  -thick disks. 
Pour 1/2 cup olive oil on a small plate. Place the disks, 
one at a time, in the oil, turning to completely coat. 
Dredge in the wasabi powder, turning to coat all 
sides, and shake off excess. Transfer to a baking 
sheet; cover with plastic wrap. Refrigerate 1 hour. 
3. Preheat the oven to 425 degrees F. Prepare an ice-water 
bath, and set aside. In a small bowl, whisk together 
the wasabi paste and vinegar. Whisk in the mayonnaise, 
sugar, and remaining 1/4 cup oil until mixture 
is smooth. Season with salt; set aside. 
4. Bring a medium saucepan of water to a boil, and 
generously add salt. Add the sugar snap and snow 
peas; blanch until they are tender and bright green, 
about 2 minutes. Drain in a colander; transfer the 
peas to the ice-water bath to stop cooking and preserve 
their color. Drain; pat dry with paper towels. 
5. Remove the coated goat cheese disks from the 
refrigerator. Bake until soft and hot in the center, 
about 7 minutes. Remove from the oven. 
6. Combine the blanched peas, pea shoots, and remaining 
1/2 cup wasabi peas in a large bowl. Season 
with salt, and drizzle with wasabi paste dressing. 
Toss well to lightly coat, and divide among 6 salad 
plates. Place 1 goat cheese disk on each plate, and 
serve immediately. 
garden tomato salad 

SERVES 20 TO 25 

To prevent bruising, snip the basil with sharp 
kitchen scissors rather than cutting it with a 
knife. You may use any combination of tomatoes; 
cut cherry tomatoes in half. 

11 pounds (about 33) ripe medium tomatoes, 
cut into   pieces 


2 medium red onions, halved lengthwise 
and thinly sliced into half-moons 


1 cup extra-virgin olive oil 

1 tablespoon coarse salt 

2 teaspoons freshly ground pepper 

1 bunch fresh basil leaves, washed well 

Combine the tomatoes and onions in a large serving 
bowl. Drizzle with the olive oil, and sprinkle with 
the salt and pepper. Cover with plastic wrap; let 
stand at room temperature at least 1 hour to allow 
flavors to develop. Snip the basil, and toss it into 
the salad just before serving. 

SALADS 147 


caesar salad 

SERVES 4 

2 garlic cloves 

1/8 teaspoon coarse salt 

1/4 pound rustic bread (half a small loaf), 
crusts removed, cut into   cubes 


1 anchovy fillet (optional) 
1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice 


1/2 teaspoon Worcestershire sauce 
1/4 teaspoon Dijon mustard 


1/2 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 
2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 


2 heads romaine lettuce (about 10 ounces 
each), outer leaves discarded, inner 
leaves cut into  -wide strips 


1/2 ounce Parmesan cheese, shaved 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees  F. In a medium bowl, 
mash 1 garlic clove with the salt to form a smooth 
paste. Add the bread cubes, and toss to combine. 
Spread the cubes in a single layer on a rimmed baking 
sheet. Bake until crisp and golden brown, about 
20 minutes, turning once. 
2. Make the vinaigrette: In a small bowl, mince the 
remaining garlic clove with the anchovy, if using, 
to form a smooth paste. Whisk in the lemon juice, 
Worcestershire sauce, mustard, and pepper. Slowly 
whisk in the oil. 
3. In a large serving bowl, toss the lettuce with the 
vinaigrette and reserved croutons. Serve immediately, 
garnished with shaved Parmesan. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 186 CALORIES, 10 G 

FAT, 4 MG CHOLESTEROL, 19 G CARBOHYDRATE, 338 MG 

SODIUM, 7 G PROTEIN, 3 G FIBER 

jicama and orange salad 
with citrus-cumin vinaigrette 

SERVES 4 

Oranges are an excellent source of vitamin C. For 
maximum health benefits, cut or juice them just 
before serving. Vitamins A and C and iron are 
also provided by baby spinach. 

2 oranges 

1 jicama (about 11/2 pounds), peeled and 
julienned 


3 ounces baby spinach, rinsed 

Citrus-Cumin Vinaigrette (recipe follows) 

Cut both ends off the oranges, and remove the peel 
and pith. Slice the fruit crosswise into   
rounds, and remove seeds. Transfer the slices to a 
large bowl, and combine with the jicama and 
spinach. Toss with the vinaigrette, and serve. 

FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 144 CALORIES, 4 G FAT, 

0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 27 G CARBOHYDRATE, 55 MG SODIUM, 

3 G PROTEIN, 7 G FIBER 

citrus-cumin vinaigrette 

MAKES 3/4 CUP 

Cumin seeds contain vitamin E as well as 
flavonoids, both powerful antioxidants. 

1 teaspoon cumin seeds 

1/2 cup fresh orange juice 

2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 

1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil 

1 tablespoon honey 

2 teaspoons Dijon mustard 

Freshly ground pepper 

Pinch of coarse salt 

1. Toast the cumin seeds in a small skillet over 
medium-high heat until fragrant, about 2 minutes. 
Remove from heat; cool slightly. Finely grind in a 
spice grinder. 
2. Blend all the ingredients until smooth. Refrigerate, 
covered, up to 3 days. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 66 CALORIES, 4 G FAT, 

0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 9 G CARBOHYDRATE, 34 MG SODIUM, 

1 G PROTEIN, 0 G FIBER 

148 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


spinach salad with fennel 
and blood oranges 

SERVES 4 

If fresh is unavailable, look for packages of prewashed 
baby spinach. Blood oranges are named 
for their vivid red-streaked flesh. 

3 blood oranges 

Juice of 1 lemon 

2 tablespoons sherry vinegar 

1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 

Freshly ground pepper 

3 slices bacon 

1 bulb fennel, very thinly sliced 

16 cremini mushrooms, very thinly sliced 

1 red onion, very thinly sliced 

6 ounces baby spinach 

1. Make the vinaigrette: Using a sharp paring knife, 
peel 2 oranges, following the curve of the fruit; cut 
between the membranes to remove whole segments. 
Place in a small bowl; set aside. Juice the remaining 
orange into a separate small bowl or large 
glass measuring cup; whisk in the lemon juice, vinegar, 
and salt. Season with pepper; set aside. 
2. In a small skillet, cook the bacon over medium 
heat until crisp and browned on both sides, about 
4 minutes per side. Transfer to drain on paper towels; 
let cool, and finely crumble. 
3. In a large serving bowl, combine the fennel, 
mushrooms, onion, and spinach. Add the reserved 
orange segments and vinaigrette, and toss to combine. 
Divide among serving plates, and sprinkle 
each with crumbled bacon. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 142 CALORIES, 3 G FAT, 

4 MG CHOLESTEROL, 26 G CARBOHYDRATE, 468 MG 

SODIUM, 7 G PROTEIN, 7 G FIBER 

green salad with 
toasted walnuts, walnut oil, 
and green beans 


SERVES 4 

Walnut oil can be found at most gourmet markets. 
Because it is more delicate than other oils, 
walnut oil should be refrigerated after it has been 
opened to keep it from going rancid. 

6 ounces green beans, ends trimmed, 
halved crosswise 


1/4 teaspoon coarse salt 

1/2 teaspoon plus 1 tablespoon walnut oil 

2 ounces walnut halves (about 1/2 cup), 
toasted and roughly chopped 


1/2 shallot, minced (about 1 tablespoon) 
2 teaspoons white-wine vinegar 


4 ounces mixed salad greens 
Freshly ground pepper 


1. Bring a medium saucepan of water to a boil. Add 
the beans, and cook until bright green and crisp-
tender, about 2 minutes. Using a slotted spoon or 
tongs, transfer to a medium serving bowl. Immediately 
toss with the salt and 1/2 teaspoon walnut oil. 
Add the walnuts, and transfer to a plate to cool, reserving 
the bowl. 
2. Make the vinaigrette: In a small bowl, combine 
the shallot with the vinegar. Whisk in the remaining 
tablespoon walnut oil. 
3. Place the salad greens in the reserved bowl, and 
add the dressing. Toss well to combine, and season 
with pepper. Divide among 4 plates, and pile the 
green beans and walnuts on top. Serve immediately. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 141 CALORIES, 6 G FAT, 

0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 6 G CARBOHYDRATE, 123 MG SODIUM, 

5 G PROTEIN, 3 G FIBER 

SALADS 149 


roasted parsnip, celery heart, 
and apple salad 

SERVES 6 

Celery hearts are the tender, pale-green inner 
stalks in a celery bunch. 

11/2 pounds parsnips (12 to 16), peeled, 
trimmed, and halved lengthwise 
(quartered, if large) 

2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
1 bunch celery hearts, cut diagonally into 
 -thick slices 
1/2 cup celery leaves 


1 green apple, such as Granny Smith, cored, 
halved, and cut into  -thick wedges 

Hazelnut Vinaigrette (recipe follows) 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Toss the parsnips with 
the oil; season with salt and pepper. Spread the 
parsnips in a single layer on a rimmed baking sheet. 
Roast until golden brown and tender, about 30 minutes. 
Let cool slightly on the sheet on a wire rack. 
2. Divide the parsnips among 6 serving plates. Put 
the celery hearts and leaves, apple, and 1/4 cup 
vinaigrette in a nonreactive bowl; season with salt 
and pepper. Toss well, and arrange on top of the 
parsnips. 
hazelnut vinaigrette 

MAKES ABOUT 3/4 CUP 

1/3 cup hazelnuts (about 1 ounce) 

1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil 

1 shallot, finely chopped 
1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon sherry vinegar 

2 teaspoons fresh lemon juice 
Coarse salt 


1/4 cup hazelnut oil or light vegetable oil, 
such as canola 


Freshly ground pepper 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Spread the hazelnuts 
in a single layer on a rimmed baking sheet. Toast in 
the oven until the skins split and the flesh turns deep 
golden brown, 10 to 12 minutes. While they are still 
hot, rub the hazelnuts in a clean kitchen towel to 
remove skins (some will remain). Coarsely chop. 

2. Heat the hazelnuts, olive oil, and shallot in a small 
skillet over medium heat, stirring, until the shallot 
softens, about 2 minutes. Let cool slightly. 
3. Stir together the vinegar, lemon juice, and 3/4 teaspoon 
salt in a medium bowl. Whisking constantly, 
pour in the hazelnut oil and then the hazelnut mixture 
in a slow, steady stream; whisk until emulsified. 
Season with salt and pepper. 
crisp romaine salad 

SERVES 8 

2 heads romaine lettuce, leaves separated 
3 carrots, thinly peeled 


8 ounces radishes, thinly sliced 
1 small red onion, thinly sliced 


2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
2 tablespoons red-wine vinegar 


1 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 


Put the lettuce, carrots, radishes, and onion in a 
salad bowl. Just before serving, lightly drizzle with 
the oil. Add the vinegar, salt, and pepper, and toss 
to combine. 

organic lettuces 
with fig vinaigrette 

SERVES 10 

Reserved poaching liquid from Oven-
Poached Figs (recipe follows) 

11/2 tablespoons red wine vinegar 

1 teaspoon balsamic vinegar 
2 teaspoons finely chopped shallot 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
1/2 cup extra-virgin olive oil 


12 cups salad greens 

Oven-Poached Figs (recipe follows), for 
serving 

Soft ripened cheeses (such as Camembert 
or goat cheese), for serving 

150 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


1. Cook the reserved poaching liquid in a small 
saucepan over medium heat until reduced to the 
consistency of syrup (about 2 tablespoons). Let cool 
completely. 
2. Whisk the reduced liquid, vinegars, and shallot 
in a small bowl. Season with 1/2 teaspoon salt and 
1/4 teaspoon pepper. Slowly whisk in the oil until 
emulsified. Season with more salt and pepper, if desired. 
Toss the greens with vinaigrette to taste. 
Serve immediately with figs and wedges of cheese. 
oven-poached figs 

MAKES 12 

12 fresh figs 
1/4 cup tawny port 


1/4 cup full-bodied red wine, 
such as Pinot Noir 


3 tablespoons honey 

1 strip orange zest (3 inches), plus 1/4 cup 
fresh orange juice 


1 cinnamon stick (3 inches) 

1 vanilla bean, seeds scraped 

2 whole green cardamom pods, split open 
2 whole cloves 


1/2 teaspoon whole black peppercorns 

1. Preheat the oven to 325 degrees  F. Put the figs in an 
8-inch-square ceramic or glass baking dish. Pour 
the port, wine, honey, and orange juice over the figs. 
Submerge the remaining ingredients in the liquid 
around the figs. Cover the dish with foil, and bake 
1 hour. 
2. Remove the foil; continue to bake 45 minutes 
more, basting 2 or 3 times with the accumulated 
juices. Let cool completely, turning the figs occasionally 
to keep them moist. 
3. Transfer the figs to a plate. Pour the liquid 
through a fine sieve into a bowl; reserve for the fig 
vinaigrette (recipe above). Discard the solids. The 
figs can be refrigerated in an airtight container up 
to 3 days. 
white wine-poached 
scallop and herb salad 


SERVES 4 TO 6 

The scallops and vegetables can be poached and 
refrigerated up to 1 day ahead. Avoid using an 
oaky Chardonnay, which may add bitterness. 

21/2 cups dry white wine 

Coarse salt 
1 bay leaf 


1 to 2 celery stalks, cut into   half-
moons (about 11/2 cups), plus 1/4 cup pale 
green leaves, very coarsely chopped 


1 small fennel bulb, halved lengthwise, core 
removed, cut crosswise into   half- 
moons (about 11/2 cups), plus 1/4 cup fronds, 
very coarsely chopped 


20 large sea scallops (about 1 pound), 
tough muscles removed 


2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice, plus 
wedges for garnish 


2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil, 
plus more for drizzling 


Freshly ground pepper 
1/2 cup fresh flat-leaf parsley, very 
coarsely chopped 
1/3 cup fresh chives, cut into   pieces 


1. Bring the wine, a pinch of salt, and the bay leaf, 
celery, and fennel to a boil in a medium saucepan. 
Reduce to a simmer; cook until the vegetables are 
just tender, about 8 minutes. Transfer the vegetables 
to a medium bowl; discard the bay leaf. Set 
aside. Add the scallops to the pan; simmer until just 
cooked through, about 3 minutes. Transfer the scallops 
to the bowl of vegetables; refrigerate until cold, 
about 30 minutes. Reserve 1/4 cup poaching liquid. 
Refrigerate until cold, about 20 minutes. 
2. Stir the lemon juice into the poaching liquid. Add 
the oil in a slow, steady stream, whisking until emulsified. 
Slice the scallops in half horizontally; toss 
with the dressing and vegetables. Season with salt 
and pepper. Toss the herbs, celery leaves, and fennel 
fronds in a small bowl, then divide among 4 serving 
plates. Top each with scallops and vegetables, 
dividing evenly. Drizzle with oil and dressing from 
the bowl. Garnish each salad with a lemon wedge. 
SALADS 151 


asparagus and string bean 
salad with basil 

SERVES 4 TO 6 

Coarse salt 

8 ounces green beans, trimmed 

8 ounces yellow wax beans, trimmed 

1 pound asparagus, trimmed 

1 small shallot, thinly sliced 

1/4 cup small fresh basil leaves, plus more for 
garnish 


1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon sherry vinegar 

1/4 cup finely grated Pecorino Romano
cheese (3/4 ounce) 


1/4 teaspoon sugar 

3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
Freshly ground pepper 


1. Prepare an ice-water bath. Bring a large pot of 
water to a boil; add salt. Cook the green beans and 
wax beans until crisp-tender, about 1 minute. Using 
a slotted spoon, transfer the beans to the ice-water 
bath. Drain; transfer to a large bowl. 
2. Cook the asparagus in boiling water until crisp-
tender, about 1 minute. Transfer the asparagus to 
the ice-water bath. Drain; cut into   pieces. Add 
to the beans. Add the shallot and basil. 
3. Make the vinaigrette: Whisk together the vinegar, 
cheese, sugar, 1/4 teaspoon salt, and the oil in a 
medium bowl until sugar has dissolved. Season 
with pepper. 
4. Add the vinaigrette to the vegetable mixture; 
toss. Refrigerate in an airtight container (or store 
in a chilled cooler) until ready to serve, up to 2 
hours. Garnish with basil. 
fig, feta, and mint salad 

SERVES 4 

French feta is creamier, milder, and less salty 
than the Greek version. Arrange this salad on a 
platter, and let your guests serve themselves. 

1 block (8 ounces) French feta cheese 

8 ounces fresh figs, halved lengthwise, if 
desired 


2 to 3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


1/2 cup fresh mint leaves 

Put the feta on a serving platter. Arrange the figs 
over and around the feta. Drizzle the figs and cheese 
with the oil; season with salt and pepper. Sprinkle 
with the mint. 

mushroom and celery salad 
with parmesan cheese 

SERVES 12 

12 ounces fresh white or cremini mushrooms, 
thinly sliced 


6 ounces fresh chanterelle, porcini, oyster, 
or yellow oyster mushrooms, thinly sliced 


6 celery stalks 

7 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 
(2 to 3 lemons) 


3 tablespoons finely chopped shallot 
6 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

8 ounces mixed baby lettuces, such as 
mache and mesclun 


6 ounces Parmigiano-Reggiano cheese 

1. Lay the mushrooms on sheets of paper towel; 
cover with clean, damp kitchen towels. Thinly slice 
the celery, and transfer it to a bowl; cover with plastic. 
Refrigerate. 
2. Stir together the lemon juice and shallot. Let 
stand at least 15 minutes or up to 2 hours. Whisk in 
the oil until emulsified, and season with salt and 
pepper. Toss the mushrooms and celery with the 
dressing; let stand 10 minutes. Divide the lettuce 
among plates, and top with the mushroom mixture. 
Shave the cheese with a vegetable peeler over tops. 
152 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


parsley-leaf salad 
with pine nuts, olives, and 
orange dressing 


SERVES 6 

The raw onions in this recipe become milder the 
longer they stay in the orange juice and vinegar 
mixture. For a strong onion flavor, let them soak 
for about 10 minutes; to make them more mellow, 
marinate for up to 4 hours. 

1/4 cup pine nuts 

1 navel orange 

1/2 teaspoon sherry vinegar or red wine 
vinegar 


1/4 medium red onion, very thinly sliced into 
half-moons 


Pinch of coarse salt 
1 tablespoon capers, rinsed and drained 


1/4 cup brine-cured black olives such as 
kalamata or Gaeta, pitted and halved 


3 cups loosely packed fresh flat-leaf parsley 
leaves (about 2 medium bunches) 

Freshly ground pepper 

1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Spread the pine nuts 
on a rimmed baking sheet; toast in the oven, shaking 
once, until golden and fragrant, 10 minutes. 
Transfer to a plate to cool. 
2. With a vegetable peeler, peel 8 long pieces of zest 
from the orange; cut lengthwise into very thin 
strips. Halve the orange; squeeze 2 tablespoons 
juice into a medium bowl (reserve unused portion 
for another use). Add the vinegar, onion, and salt; 
let stand 10 minutes. Add the capers, olives, parsley, 
pine nuts, and zest to bowl. Season with pepper; 
toss thoroughly with oil. Divide among 6 plates. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 82 CALORIES, 6 G FAT, 

0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 6 G CARBOHYDRATE, 128 MG SODIUM, 

3 G PROTEIN, 2 G FIBER 

watercress and 
green bean salad 

SERVES 4 

To keep watercress fresh, wrap it in damp paper 
towels and place it in a resealable plastic bag. 
Stored this way, it can be refrigerated for up to 4 
days. Just before making the salad, "crisp" the 
watercress by soaking it in a bowl of ice water for 
a few minutes, then gently pat dry. 

1/2 teaspoon coarse salt, plus more 
for seasoning 


8 ounces green beans, trimmed and 
cut into   pieces 


2 tablespoons finely chopped shallot 
2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 


Freshly ground pepper 
2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 


1 Kirby cucumber, peeled, halved 
lengthwise, and thinly sliced 


1 bunch watercress, thick stems discarded 

1/4 cup packed mint leaves, large leaves 
torn in half 


1. Prepare an ice-water bath; set aside. Bring a 
medium pot of water to a boil; add salt. Blanch the 
green beans until crisp-tender, 4 to 5 minutes. Immediately 
transfer with a slotted spoon to the ice-
water bath to stop the cooking. Drain, and set aside. 
2. Whisk together the shallot, lemon juice, and 1/2 
teaspoon salt in a large serving bowl; season with 
pepper. Whisking constantly, pour in the oil in a 
slow, steady stream; whisk until emulsified. 
3. Add the cucumber and reserved green beans to 
the bowl; toss to coat. Add the watercress and mint; 
gently toss. Season with salt and pepper. 
SALADS 153 


beet and mache 
salad with aged goat cheese 


SERVES 4 TO 6 

2 pounds mixed beets, such as red and 
Chioggia 


Orange Vinaigrette (recipe follows) 
1/4 cup fresh chervil leaves 


3 ounces mache or other tender lettuce 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


6 ounces Bucheron or other aged goat 
cheese, room temperature, for serving 


Crackers, for serving 

1. Cover the beets with cold water by 2 inches in a 
large saucepan. Bring to a boil; reduce heat to 
medium. Simmer until tender, about 30 minutes. 
Let cool; peel, and halve (quarter if large). Toss with 
the vinaigrette. Let stand 30 minutes. 
2. Toss together the chervil and mache. Top with 
the beets and 2 tablespoons vinaigrette from the 
the bowl. Season with salt and pepper. Serve with 
goat cheese and crackers. 
orange vinaigrette 

MAKES 11/3 CUPS 

1 tablespoon orange zest 

3/4 cup fresh orange juice 
2 tablespoons sherry vinegar 
1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 


1/2 cup extra-virgin olive oil 
Freshly ground pepper 


Stir together the orange zest, orange juice, vinegar, 
and salt in a small bowl. Pour in the olive oil in a 
slow, steady stream, whisking until emulsified. Season 
with freshly ground pepper. 

arugula and radicchio 
with parmesan shavings 

SERVES 6 

9 ounces fresh arugula (about 8 cups), 
stemmed 


4 ounces radicchio, halved crosswise and 
cut into thin strips (about 11/2 cups) 


8 ounces Parmesan cheese, shaved with a 
vegetable peeler (1/2 cup) 


11/2 tablespoons balsamic vinegar 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 


1. Put the arugula, radicchio, and Parmesan in a 
serving bowl, and set aside. 
2. Whisk the vinegar with salt and pepper to taste 
in a medium bowl. Whisking constantly, pour in the 
oil in a slow, steady stream, and whisk until emulsified. 
Toss the salad with just enough vinaigrette 
to coat. 
shaved cucumber, fennel, 
and watermelon salad 

SERVES 6 

Ricotta salata is a firmer version of fresh ricotta; 
it is perfect for shaving over salads. 

4 cucumbers 

1 fennel bulb, trimmed, plus 1 tablespoon 
chopped fronds 


31/2 pounds watermelon, cut into   cubes 

2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 
2 tablespoons olive oil 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
4 ounces ricotta salata 


Using a mandoline, slice the cucumbers lengthwise 
into paper-thin slices; slice the fennel bulb crosswise 
into paper-thin slices. Combine the cucumbers 
and fennel in a large serving bowl. Add the 
watermelon, fennel fronds, lemon juice, and oil. Season 
with salt and pepper; toss to combine. Using a 
vegetable peeler, shave the ricotta salata over the 
salad, and serve. 

154 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


mixed green salad 
with date-walnut vinaigrette 


SERVES 6 TO 8 

1 cup walnut halves (about 4 ounces) 

5 ounces dates, pitted 
1 teaspoon Dijon mustard 


1/2 cup cider vinegar 
1/2 cup extra-virgin olive oil 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
1 head green-leaf lettuce 


1 head red Bibb lettuce 
3 heads Belgian endive (about 12 ounces) 


4 ounces baby spinach 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees  F. Spread the walnuts 
in a single layer on a rimmed baking sheet, and 
toast in the oven until golden and fragrant, 10 to 12 
minutes. Let cool. 
2. In a food processor, pulse 5 dates and the mustard 
and vinegar until pureed. With the machine 
running, slowly pour the oil through the feed tube. 
Season with salt and pepper. 
3. Quarter the remaining dates lengthwise. Into a 
large bowl, tear the lettuce and endive into bite-size 
pieces; add the spinach, dates, and walnuts. Drizzle 
with the vinaigrette, and toss to combine. Serve 
immediately. 
red and green salad 
with cranberry vinaigrette 


SERVES 8 

1 head frisee (about 5 ounces) 

1 head red-leaf lettuce (about 10 ounces) 

4 ounces baby spinach 

1/2 cup fresh or frozen (thawed) cranberries 
1 tablespoon raspberry vinegar 


2 teaspoons fresh lime juice 

1 teaspoon sugar 

1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil 


3/4 cup dried cranberries 
11/2 ounces Manchego cheese 
1. Tear the frisee and red-leaf lettuce into bite-size 
pieces; combine with the spinach in a large bowl. 
Set aside. 
2. In a blender, combine the cranberries, vinegar, 
lime juice, sugar, salt, and oil; puree until the mixture 
is smooth. 
3. Sprinkle the dried cranberries over the salad 
greens in a bowl; toss to combine. Divide the salad 
among serving plates. Using a vegetable peeler to 
shave thin slices, divide the cheese among individual 
salads. Serve with cranberry vinaigrette on 
the side. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 140 CALORIES, 9 G FAT, 

5 MG CHOLESTEROL, 15 G CARBOHYDRATE, 192 MG SODIUM, 

3 G PROTEIN, 2 G FIBER 

SALADS 155 


mixed baby lettuces 
with anchovy vinaigrette 


SERVES 6 

1 teaspoon Dijon mustard 

6 anchovy fillets, rinsed and mashed 
2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 


1/3 cup extra-virgin olive oil 

1 tablespoon finely chopped fresh flat-leaf 
parsley 


Freshly ground pepper 
Mixed baby lettuces, for serving 


In a food processor, combine the mustard, anchovies, 
and lemon juice. Process until smooth. 
With the machine running, add the oil in a steady 
stream until smooth and emulsified. Stir in the parsley; 
season with pepper. Serve in small bowls, with 
lettuces on the side for dipping. 

iceberg lettuce with blue cheese 
dressing and toasted almonds 

SERVES 4 

2 ounces whole shelled almonds 
41/2 ounces blue cheese, crumbled 

11/2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 
1/3 cup buttermilk 

11/2 tablespoons olive oil 
Freshly ground pepper 

1 head iceberg lettuce, cut into 4 wedges 

1 Granny Smith apple


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Spread the almonds 
on a rimmed baking sheet, and bake until lightly 
toasted, 7 to 8 minutes. Let cool, then coarsely chop. 
2. In a medium bowl, whisk together the cheese, 
lemon juice, buttermilk, and oil until smooth, and 
season with pepper. 
3. Break each lettuce wedge in half. Divide among 
4 plates; top with apple cubes. Spoon dressing over 
each serving. Garnish with almonds, and serve. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 290 CALORIES, 

22 G FAT, 25 MG CHOLESTEROL, 14 G CARBOHYDRATE, 

478 MG SODIUM, 12 G PROTEIN, 5 G FIBER 

asian pear salad 

SERVES 4 

4 cups mixed frisee, baby arugula, and 
other small greens (about 11 ounces) 


8 dates, pitted and quartered lengthwise 

8 slices prosciutto (about 4 ounces), sliced 
into  -wide strips 


8 sprigs mint, leaves picked from stems 
(about 1 cup) 


1 Asian pear, cored and sliced into   
wedges 


2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice (about 
1 lemon) 


2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


In a large bowl, toss together the greens, dates, prosciutto, 
mint, and pear. In a small bowl, whisk together 
the lemon juice and oil; season with salt and 
pepper. Pour the mixture over the salad. Toss to 
combine well, and serve immediately. 

hearts of lettuce 
with russian dressing 


SERVES 8 TO 10 

3 small heads lettuce 
11/2 cups mayonnaise 

1/2 cup ketchup or chili sauce 
1/2 cup sour cream 


1/2 cup finely chopped cornichon or sweet 
pickle relish 


2 tablespoons chopped fresh dill 
4 teaspoons chopped drained capers 


2 shallots, finely chopped 

Cut the lettuce in wedges; arrange in a bowl. Whisk 
together the remaining ingredients. Pour over the 
lettuce; serve. The dressing can be stored, refrigerated, 
up to 1 week. 

156 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


farmstand raw vegetable salad 

SERVES 6 

Chioggia beets are pink on the outside and 
striped on the inside. Because they are not 
cooked in this recipe, choose tender baby beets. 
You can use red or golden beets if Chioggia beets 
are unavailable. After your grill becomes hot, grill 
the lemon halves, cut side down, until lightly 
charred. Remove, let cool slightly, and squeeze 
their warm juice over the vegetables. 

6 ounces sugar snap peas, sliced 
diagonally into   lengths 


2 Kirby cucumbers, sliced 

2 ears fresh corn, kernels cut off cobs 

12 baby Chioggia beets, scrubbed and 
halved lengthwise 


1 lemon, halved 

2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

In a large bowl, combine the peas, cucumbers, corn, 
and beets. Squeeze the lemon juice over the vegetables, 
and drizzle with the oil. Season with salt 
and pepper. Toss to combine, and serve at room 
temperature. 

haricots verts and goat cheese 
salad with almonds 

SERVES 6 

2 ounces whole almonds (about 1/2 cup) 

Coarse salt 

11/2 pounds haricots verts, ends trimmed 
11/2 teaspoons sherry vinegar 
1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil 

Freshly ground pepper 
21/2 ounces fresh goat cheese, crumbled 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Spread the almonds 
on a rimmed baking sheet, and place in the oven. 
Toast until they are fragrant and golden, about 10 
minutes. Remove from the oven; let cool. Roughly 
chop; set aside. 
2. Meanwhile, bring a stockpot of water to a boil, 
and add salt and the haricots verts; cook until their 
color brightens and the beans are crisp-tender, 
about 4 minutes. Drain, and transfer to a baking 
sheet; let cool, about 5 minutes. 
3. While still warm, toss the beans in a serving bowl 
with the vinegar and olive oil; season with salt and 
pepper. Add the goat cheese, and stir to melt 
slightly and coat the beans. Sprinkle with the almonds, 
and serve. 
romaine salad 
with prosciutto crisps 


SERVES 4 

The small inner leaves of romaine lettuce are tender 
and crisp, perfect for this salad. Use a vegetable 
peeler to shave the Pecorino Romano. 

2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil, plus 
more for the pan 


4 slices prosciutto (about 2 ounces) 
1 tablespoon balsamic vinegar 


1 teaspoon fresh thyme leaves, 
roughly chopped 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

6 ounces hearts of romaine, leaves torn 
in half 


1 ounce Pecorino Romano shavings 

1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Lightly brush a baking 
sheet with olive oil, and arrange the prosciutto 
in a single layer. Place in the oven, and bake until 
crisp, 5 to 10 minutes. Remove from the oven, and 
let cool on a wire rack. 
2. Combine the olive oil, balsamic vinegar, and 
thyme; season with salt and pepper, and whisk to 
combine. Add the romaine and shaved Pecorino Romano, 
and toss to combine. Serve topped with prosciutto 
crisps. 
SALADS 157 


green gazpacho salad 

SERVES 6 

1/2 cup slivered almonds 

4 ounces baguette or other French bread, 
cut into   cubes (11/2 cups) 


1 yellow tomato, seeded, cut into 


1 green bell pepper, seeded, cut into


1 cucumber, peeled, seeded, and cut 
into   dice 


2 stalks celery, cut into   dice 

1 small red onion, cut into   dice 

2 scallions, thinly sliced 

1 cup (about 6 ounces) green seedless 
grapes, cut in half 


1/4 cup finely chopped flat-leaf parsley 

2 tablespoons finely chopped tarragon 
1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil 


2 tablespoons sherry or white-wine vinegar 
1 teaspoon coarse salt 


1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 

1 head Boston or butter lettuce, torn into 
bite-size pieces 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Place the nuts on a 
rimmed baking sheet and the bread cubes on a baking 
sheet; toast until the nuts are aromatic and the 
bread is dried and barely golden, about 8 to 10 minutes; 
set aside. 
2. In a large bowl, combine the tomato, pepper, cucumber, 
celery, red onion, scallions, grapes, parsley, 
tarragon, half the almonds, and the bread cubes. 
Drizzle with the olive oil and vinegar. Add the salt 
and pepper. Toss well to combine. Let sit for 30 minutes 
for flavors to blend. Serve over the lettuce, garnished 
with the remaining almonds. 
wilted brussels sprouts salad 
with warm apple cider dressing 

SERVES 6 

1 pound Brussels sprouts, trimmed 

4 ounces spinach (about 3 cups lightly 
packed leaves), washed, stems removed 


1 small head radicchio 

1 garlic clove, finely chopped 
1/3 cup apple cider vinegar 


2 tablespoons honey mustard 
11/2 tablespoons sugar 

1 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 


1/2 cup extra-virgin olive oil 
Goat cheese, for garnish 


Toasted caraway seeds, for garnish 

1. Thinly slice the Brussels sprouts crosswise into 
strips. Repeat with the spinach leaves and radicchio. 
Place the Brussels sprouts, spinach, and radicchio 
in a large bowl, and toss to combine; set aside. 
2. In a small saucepan, whisk together the garlic, 
apple cider vinegar, honey mustard, sugar, salt, and 
pepper over medium heat. Slowly drizzle in the 
olive oil while whisking constantly. Bring to a simmer, 
and cook until the mixture thickens slightly, 
about 3 minutes. Pour over the Brussels sprouts 
mixture, and toss to combine. Serve the salad warm, 
garnished with goat cheese and caraway seeds, or 
store in refrigerator up to 2 days, and serve cold. 
158 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


  

SALADS 159 


new classic panzanella 

SERVES 6 

You can intensify the garlic flavor by rubbing an 
additional clove on one side of the toasted bread 
before tearing it into chunks. 

1 garlic clove, peeled 

2 pounds ripe beefsteak tomatoes, cored 
and cut into large chunks 


1 medium red onion, peeled and 
thinly sliced 


5 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

3 tablespoons red-wine vinegar 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


5  -thick slices day-old Tuscan-style 
bread 


4 Kirby cucumbers (about 12 ounces), 
peeled and sliced 


1 cup packed fresh basil leaves 

1. Place the garlic on a cutting board; hit it with the 
side of a large knife to break it open a bit. Place 
the tomatoes, onion, and garlic in a large nonreactive 
bowl. Drizzle the oil and vinegar over the vegetable 
mixture; season with salt and pepper. Toss; 
let stand, covered, in a cool place, about 1 hour. 
2. Place the bread on a hot grill or under a heated 
broiler; toast until both sides are slightly charred, 
2 to 3 minutes. Remove from heat, rub lightly with 
garlic, if desired; tear the bread into bite-size 
chunks. When ready to serve, add the cucumbers, 
basil, and bread to the tomatoes. 
3. Toss to coat the bread thoroughly with the marinating 
liquid. Adjust the seasoning with salt and 
pepper, and remove the garlic clove. 
VARIATION[S]: To either version of this salad, try 
adding cubed fresh mozzarella or bocconcini, 
roasted bell peppers, sliced fresh fennel, or capers. 
Experiment using other in-season vegetables. 

endive and treviso radicchio 
salad with anchovy dressing 

SERVES 4 

Soaking the anchovies in red-wine vinegar gives 
them a wonderful pickled flavor. 

6 anchovy fillets 

1/4 cup plus 1 tablespoon red-wine vinegar 
1 garlic clove, smashed and peeled 


1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 

3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 

4 endives, sliced 1/4 inch lengthwise 

1 head Treviso radicchio, leaves separated 

1. In a small bowl, submerge the anchovies in 1/4 cup 
red-wine vinegar. Let soak for 30 minutes; drain, 
and discard the liquid. 
2. Place the anchovies and garlic on a cutting board. 
Sprinkle with salt, and mince into a paste; place in 
a medium bowl. Whisk in the remaining tablespoon 
vinegar, the olive oil, and the pepper. Set aside. 
3. Arrange the sliced endives and Treviso radicchio 
leaves on 4 salad plates. Drizzle the anchovy mixture 
over each. Serve immediately. 
hearty bacon and 
lemon chicory salad 

SERVES 4 

8 slices bacon 
1 medium red onion, sliced thinly 
lengthwise 
1 small head chicory, roughly chopped 


1 small head frisee, roughly chopped 
Juice of 1 lemon 


3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

1 teaspoon coarse salt 

1/2 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 

160 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


1. Place the bacon in a large skillet over medium 
heat. Cook until it is golden and crisp. Drain on 
paper towels. Break into 1- to 1  pieces; set 
aside. Drain all but 11/2 tablespoons bacon fat from 
the pan. Add the onion. Cook over medium heat 
until soft and golden, about 5 minutes. Remove 
from heat. 
2. Place the chicory, frisee, bacon, and onion in a 
large bowl. In another bowl, whisk the lemon juice, 
olive oil, salt, and pepper. Drizzle over the salad, 
and toss. Serve the salad immediately. 

chopped beet salad 
with feta and pecans 

SERVES 12 TO 14 

We used several varieties of beets, including 
Golden Globe and Chioggia, for a colorful salad, 
but you may use any variety you like. 

1/2 cup pecans 
4 bunches small beets (16 to 20 beets) 


3 tablespoons cider vinegar 
3 tablespoons olive oil 


4 ounces feta cheese, crumbled 

2 tablespoons freshly chopped flat-leaf 
parsley, plus sprigs for garnish

Combine ingredients in bowl and serve chilled.


avocado filled with mixed 
herb and shallot vinaigrette 

SERVES 6 

3 tablespoons champagne vinegar 

1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice 
11/2 teaspoons Dijon mustard 

6 tablespoons canola oil 
1/2 teaspoon salt 


1/8 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 
1 small shallot, finely chopped 


1/4 cup loosely packed fresh herbs, such as 
dill, chervil, parsley, and tarragon, 
coarsely chopped 


3 ripe avocados, such as Hass or bacon 

1. Combine the vinegar, lemon juice, and mustard 
in the jar of a blender. Slowly add the oil in a steady 
stream, blending until incorporated. Add the salt 
and pepper. Stir in the chopped shallot and herbs. 
2. Slice the avocados lengthwise, rotating the knife 
around the pit. Twist the two halves of the avocado 
in opposite directions to separate. Embed the knife 
in the pit, and twist to separate the pit from the avocado. 
Fill each avocado half with a spoonful of the 
vinaigrette, and serve immediately. 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Place the pecans on 
a baking sheet, and toast until fragrant, about 10 
minutes. Transfer to a bowl to cool. Coarsely chop, 
and set aside. Raise oven temperature to 450 degrees F. 
2. Trim the greens and long roots from the beets. 
Wrap in 2 to 3 aluminum foil packets, dividing the 
beets according to size. Place in the oven, and roast 
until tender, 45 to 60 minutes, depending on the 
size of the beets. Using paper towels to protect your 
hands, wipe the skins from the beets. Cut them into 
wedges, and transfer to a serving bowl. 
3. Drizzle the vinegar and olive oil over the beets; 
toss to coat (beets can be made ahead). When ready 
to serve, add the feta, parsley, pecans, and salt and 
pepper to taste; toss to combine. Garnish with the 
parsley sprigs. 
RIPENING AVOCADOS 

When they are perfectly ripe, avocados will 
yield slightly when pressed. To speed ripening, 
place avocados in a paper bag with an 
apple or a banana, and store at room temperature 
for a few days. To keep them from 
becoming too soft, store ripened avocados in 
the refrigerator for up to 2 days. 

SALADS 161 


warm leeks vinaigrette 

SERVES 6 

4 teaspoons sherry vinegar 

4 teaspoons Dijon mustard 

1 tablespoon honey 

1 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 


4 teaspoons extra-virgin olive oil 

3 bunches leeks (about 15 leeks) 

1. Whisk together the vinegar, mustard, honey, salt, 
and pepper in a large bowl. Slowly drizzle in the 
olive oil, whisking constantly, until well combined; 
set aside. 
2. Trim the leeks to about 6 inches, leaving only the 
white and light green parts. Trim the roots, and cut 
the leeks in half lengthwise. Wash well under cold 
running water to remove any dirt; set aside. 
3. Place a metal steamer basket in a large saucepan. 
Fill with water to the bottom of the basket, and bring 
to a simmer. Add the leeks, cover, and steam until 
tender, about 10 minutes. Remove the leeks, and 
drain on paper towels to remove any water. Place 
the leeks in the bowl with the vinaigrette, and toss 
to combine. Serve hot or at room temperature. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 121 CALORIES, 4 G FAT, 

0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 22 G CARBOHYDRATE, 255 MG 

SODIUM, 2 G PROTEIN, 3 G FIBER 

summer-squash salad 
with herbs and pecorino fresco 

SERVES 6 

If you can find it, use Zephyr squash, which is yellow 
with a pale-green tip. You can also use a mix 
of young green and yellow squashes. 

1 pound small, young summer squashes 
(about 8), cut into  -thick rounds 
(halved if large) 


2 tablespoons fresh oregano or 
thyme leaves 


1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil 
Freshly ground pepper 


6 ounces pecorino fresco, crumbled 
(about 11/2 cups) 


Toss together squashes, herbs, and oil in a large bowl; 
season with pepper. Add cheese; toss. Let stand at 
room temperature 15 minutes before serving. 

shaved beet and 
dandelion salad 

SERVES 8 

2 teaspoons finely chopped shallot 

1 teaspoon Dijon mustard 
2 anchovy fillets, finely chopped 


2 tablespoons sherry vinegar 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


1/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons extra-virgin 
olive oil 


1 small red or yellow beet, peeled and 
shaved into very thin pieces 


2 bunches dandelion or arugula, or a 
combination (about 20 ounces total), 
trimmed to bottom of leaf, torn if large 


In a large bowl, whisk together shallot, mustard, anchovies, 
and vinegar; season with salt and pepper. 
Whisk in oil in a slow, steady stream. Add beet and 
dandelion. Toss to coat. 

cucumber, string bean, 
and olive salad 

SERVES 4 

To pit the olives, place them on a cutting board, 
and press firmly with your thumb. The olives will 
split, and the pits can be easily removed. 

Coarse salt 

1/2 pound string beans 
2 cucumbers (11/4 pounds) 


1/4 pound oil-cured black olives, pitted, torn 
in half 


1/4 cup fresh flat-leaf parsley leaves 
1 teaspoon Dijon mustard 


1 tablespoon red-wine vinegar 
Freshly ground pepper 


2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

162 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


1. Fill a large bowl with ice and water; set aside. Bring 
a pot of water to a boil. Salt the water; add the string 
beans, and cook until bright green and just tender, 
3 to 4 minutes. Drain, and transfer to the ice-water 
bath until cool. Drain, and cut in half lengthwise. 
2. Peel the cucumbers, and split them lengthwise. 
Remove the seeds using a melon baller or a spoon. 
Cut into  -thick slices on the diagonal. Combine 
with string beans, olives, and parsley leaves in 
a medium serving bowl. 
3. Whisk together the mustard, red-wine vinegar, 
and salt and pepper to taste in a small bowl. Slowly 
add the olive oil, whisking constantly. Toss with the 
salad just before serving. 
chilled shrimp and 
chopped tomato salad with 
crisp garlic croutons 

SERVES 8 TO 10 

We recommend serving this juicy salad as a first 
course, either alone or accompanied by mixed 
greens. We used beefsteak tomatoes, but any 
fresh, ripe tomatoes would be equally delicious. 

3 quarts water 

2 tablespoons coarse salt, plus more for 
seasoning 


1/4 teaspoon whole peppercorns 

1 teaspoon paprika 

2 dried bay leaves 

2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 
2 pounds large shrimp, peeled and 
deveined 
5 garlic cloves 


2 red bell peppers, seeds and ribs removed 

4 ripe beefsteak tomatoes (about 13/4 
pounds) 


1 medium cucumber, peeled, seeded, and 
cut into   dice 


1 green bell pepper, seeds and ribs 
removed, cut into   dice 


1/2 small red onion, finely diced 
(about 3/4 cup) 


2 tablespoons roughly chopped fresh 
marjoram or oregano 


2 tablespoons plus 1 teaspoon red-wine 
vinegar 


1/2 cup extra-virgin olive oil, plus more for 
drizzling, if desired 


6 slices rustic bread, crusts removed, cut 
into   cubes (about 21/2 cups) 


Freshly ground black pepper 

1. Prepare an ice-water bath; set aside. In a 5-quart 
stockpot, combine the water with 2 tablespoons salt, 
the peppercorns, paprika, bay leaves, and lemon 
juice; bring to a boil. Reduce heat to medium; simmer 
5 minutes. Add the shrimp; stir once. Cook until 
the shrimp are pink and opaque, about 11/2 minutes. 
With a large sieve, transfer the shrimp to the ice 
bath. Chill thoroughly, at least 2 minutes, and drain 
in the sieve. Cut each shrimp in half crosswise. Place 
in a bowl, cover with plastic wrap, and refrigerate 
until ready to use. 
2. In a food processor fitted with the metal blade, 
chop the garlic. Remove 2 teaspoons; set aside. 
Quarter 1 red pepper and 1 tomato; add to the remaining 
garlic in the processor. Pulse until a coarse 
puree forms. Pour into a large mixing bowl. 
3. Cut the remaining red pepper and 3 tomatoes 
into   dice, and add to the bowl along with the 
cucumber, green pepper, red onion, marjoram, vinegar, 
and 1/4 cup olive oil; stir to combine. 
4. Meanwhile, in a large saute pan, heat 2 tablespoons 
olive oil over medium heat, and fry half the 
bread cubes until they just begin to turn crisp and 
golden brown, about 3 minutes. Add half the reserved 
chopped garlic and a pinch of salt; cook, stirring 
frequently, until the garlic is fragrant and the 
bread cubes are golden brown, about 1 minute 
more. Transfer to a large plate, and repeat the 
process with the remaining garlic and bread cubes. 
Just before serving, toss the shrimp and half the 
croutons into the salad mixture, season with salt 
and pepper, and drizzle with more olive oil, if desired. 
Serve the remaining croutons on the side or 
on top of each portion. 
SALADS 163 


warm eggplant salad 

SERVES 4 

12 ounces small round white eggplants, 
sliced 1/4 inch thick 


Salt 
1/2 cup extra-virgin olive oil 


Freshly ground pepper 
1 small red onion, peeled, thinly sliced 


2 ounces French feta cheese, crumbled 

1/3 cup oil-cured black olives, pitted, 
quartered lengthwise 


2 teaspoons fresh oregano leaves 

1. Sprinkle the eggplant slices with salt on both 
sides. Place in a colander over a bowl, and let stand 
1 hour to drain. Discard the liquid, and rinse under 
cold running water. Place the eggplant slices on 
several layers of paper towel; press out the water. 
2. Transfer the eggplant to a nonreactive surface. 
Generously brush both sides with oil; sprinkle with 
pepper. Heat 2 tablespoons oil in a large skillet over 
medium-high heat. Add slices of eggplant (without 
crowding); cook until golden brown on both sides, 
about 6 minutes. Drain on paper towels. Repeat the 
process with the remaining slices. 
3. Place the eggplant, onion, feta, olives, and 
oregano in a large bowl. Drizzle with the remaining 
olive oil, and season with salt and pepper, if necessary. 
Gently toss the mixture to combine, and 
serve warm or at room temperature. 
watercress, pink grapefruit, 
and walnut salad 

SERVES 4 

for the dressing 

21/4 tablespoons minced ginger 

1/4 teaspoon minced garlic 
1 tablespoon fresh lime juice 


11/2 teaspoons rice-wine vinegar 
1/4 teaspoon Asian sesame oil 

1/8 teaspoon sugar 
3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 


for the salad 

1 pink grapefruit 

8 ounces watercress (about 2 bunches), 
thick stems removed 


1/2 cup walnuts, coarsely chopped 

1/8 teaspoon coarse salt 
Freshly ground pepper 


1. Make the dressing: Whisk together ginger, garlic, 
lime juice, vinegar, sesame oil, and sugar in a 
small bowl. Gradually add olive oil, whisking constantly 
until fully combined. Set aside. 
2. Remove peel and pith from grapefruit. Holding 
over a medium bowl, carve out flesh between the 
membranes, letting segments drop into the bowl 
(you should have about 3/4 cup segments). Add watercress. 
Pour dressing over watercress and grapefruit; 
toss to coat. Sprinkle with walnuts. Season 
with salt and pepper. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 216 CALORIES, 20 G 

FAT, 0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 8 G CARBOHYDRATE, 59 MG 

SODIUM, 4 G PROTEIN, 2 G FIBER 

164 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


mache with fennel, 
carrot, and orange 

SERVES 4 

Mache, or lamb's lettuce, is a tender, nutty green. 
If it's unavailable, try watercress as a delicious 
substitute. 

2 tablespoons plus 1 teaspoon fresh 
lemon juice 


1 tablespoon champagne vinegar 

1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 
Pinch of sugar 


Freshly ground pepper 
1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil 


1/4 pound baby or halved regular carrots, 
peeled into ribbons (about 21/2 cups) 


1/2 medium fennel bulb (about 10 ounces), 
trimmed, halved lengthwise, and thinly 
sliced crosswise 


1 medium shallot, halved lengthwise 
and thinly sliced 


3 small oranges, peel and pith removed, 
carved into segments using a sharp knife 
(about 11/4 cups) 


4 cups mache 

1. Make the dressing: Whisk together lemon juice, 
vinegar, salt, and sugar in a medium bowl; season 
with pepper. Add oil in a slow, steady stream, whisking 
constantly until emulsified. 
2. Make the salad: Toss carrots and fennel in a bowl 
with dressing to coat. Let stand until softened, about 
15 minutes. Using a slotted spoon, transfer carrot-
fennel mixture to a large bowl; discard excess dressing. 
Add shallot, orange segments, and mache; toss 
to combine. Divide salad among 4 serving plates. 
SIDE SALADS 


white bean salad 
with carrots and tomatoes 


SERVES 4 TO 6 

1 cup dried white beans, such as navy 

2 medium carrots, peeled and cut 
into   dice 


1 small red onion, finely chopped 
1 cup grape tomatoes, halved lengthwise 


1 tablespoon finely chopped fresh 
flat-leaf parsley 


1/4 cup red-wine vinegar 
1 tablespoon fresh thyme, chopped 


1/2 teaspoon sugar 
3 tablespoons olive oil 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1. Put the beans into a large bowl; cover with water 
by 2 inches. Cover with plastic wrap. Let soak at room 
temperature 6 hours (or overnight). Drain; rinse. 
2. Transfer the beans to a medium saucepan; cover 
with cold water by 11/2 inches. Bring to a simmer. 
Cook, covered, until tender, about 25 minutes. 
Drain. Rinse with cold water, and let cool completely. 
Transfer to a bowl; cover with plastic wrap. 
Refrigerate 15 minutes. 
3. Add the carrots, onion, tomatoes, and parsley to 
beans; toss well. Whisk together the vinegar, thyme, 
sugar, oil, and 1/2 teaspoon salt in a bowl until sugar 
has dissolved; season with pepper. Toss the vinaigrette 
with the bean mixture. Season with salt and 
pepper. Refrigerate in an airtight container (or store 
in a chilled cooler) until ready to serve, up to 4 hours. 
SALADS 165 


roasted carrot and beet salad 

SERVES 4 

For a complete meal, serve this salad with pita 
bread, feta cheese, and hummus. If you are on a 
low-sodium diet, substitute a less salty cheese for 
the feta. 

4 medium red beets (about 1 pound without 
greens), 1/2 inch of stems left intact 


2 tablespoons plus 2 teaspoons 
extra-virgin olive oil 


1 pound carrots (about 8 medium), cut on 
the diagonal into   pieces 


1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 
2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 


2 tablespoons coarsely chopped fresh 
flat-leaf parsley 


1 tablespoon finely chopped fresh thyme 

Freshly ground pepper 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Toss the beets with 1 
teaspoon oil on a rimmed baking sheet. Cover the 
sheet with foil. Roast the beets until tender, 45 to 55 
minutes. Let cool. Trim and peel the beets; cut into 
  cubes. 
2. Meanwhile, toss the carrots, 1 teaspoon oil, and 
1/4 teaspoon salt on another rimmed baking sheet. 
Roast the carrots until browned and tender, about 
40 minutes. Let cool to room temperature. 
3. Stir the lemon juice, remaining 1/4 teaspoon salt, 
and the parsley and thyme in a small bowl. Whisk 
in the remaining 2 tablespoons oil until emulsified. 
Season with pepper. Toss the beets and carrots with 
the dressing in a medium bowl. The salad can be 
refrigerated in an airtight container up to 3 days. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 405 CALORIES, 

22 G FAT, 25 MG CHOLESTEROL, 44 G CARBOHYDRATE, 

892 MG SODIUM, 12 G PROTEIN, 10 G FIBER 

three-bean salad with 
honey-mustard vinaigrette 

SERVES 4 

Juice of 2 limes 

11/2 tablespoons finely chopped fresh 
tarragon leaves 

11/2 tablespoons finely chopped fresh chives 
1 tablespoon honey 

11/2 teaspoons Dijon mustard 
1/4 teaspoon coarse salt 

1/4 pound haricots verts or green beans, 
trimmed and cut into thirds 


1 cup canned kidney beans, drained and 
rinsed 


1 cup canned cannellini beans, drained 
and rinsed 


1 ounce mache or watercress, trimmed, 
rinsed, and spun dry 


Freshly ground pepper 

1. Make the vinaigrette: In a small bowl, whisk together 
the lime juice, tarragon, chives, honey, mustard, 
and salt until combined. Set aside. 
2. Prepare an ice-water bath; set aside. Bring a 
medium saucepan of water to a boil. Add the haricots 
verts or green beans; simmer until bright green 
but still crisp, about 2 minutes. Using a slotted 
spoon, transfer the haricots verts to the ice bath, 
and let cool completely. Drain in a colander, and 
pat dry with paper towels. Place in a large serving 
bowl. Add the kidney beans and cannellini, and 
drizzle with vinaigrette. Toss to coat. Gently toss in 
the mache or watercress; season with pepper. Serve. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 105 CALORIES, 0 G FAT, 

0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 21 G CARBOHYDRATE, 164 MG SODIUM, 

6 G PROTEIN, 6 G FIBER 

166 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


corn-mango salad 

SERVES 6 TO 8 

6 cups fresh corn kernels (from 6 cooked 
ears of corn) 


1 large mango


10 scallions, white and pale-green parts only, 
cut into very thin matchsticks 


1/4 cup thinly sliced fresh red chile 
(1 to 2 chiles) 


1 cup fresh lime juice (about 7 limes) 
11/4 teaspoons coarse salt 

Toss the corn, mango, scallions, chile, lime juice, 
and salt in a large bowl. Refrigerate, covered, 
30 minutes, or up to 2 days. Serve cold or at room 
temperature. 

mixed mushroom salad 

SERVES 6 TO 8 

1/4 cup fresh lemon juice (about 2 lemons) 

1 tablespoon coarsely chopped fresh 
oregano 


1 tablespoon coarsely chopped 
fresh flat-leaf parsley 


1 tablespoon coarsely chopped fresh 
marjoram 


1 teaspoon coarse salt 

Freshly ground pepper 

3/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil, plus more 
for drizzling 
6 cups thinly sliced mixed fresh mushrooms, 
such as cremini, shiitake, oyster, and 
button (about 1 pound) 

2 bunches arugula (about 1 pound) 

1/2 small head radicchio (about 8 ounces), 
thinly sliced 


3 ounces Parmesan cheese, shaved with 
a vegetable peeler into  -thick strips 


1. In a large bowl, whisk together the lemon juice, 
herbs, salt, and 1/2 teaspoon pepper. Whisk in the 
oil. Reserve 1 tablespoon dressing; set aside. Add 
the mushrooms to the remaining dressing, and toss 
to combine. Set aside. 
2. Toss together the arugula, radicchio, and reserved 
dressing. Arrange on a large platter. Top with the 
mushroom mixture. Sprinkle with the Parmesan 
cheese, and drizzle with oil. Season with pepper. 
cucumber salad 
with radish and dill 

SERVES 4 TO 6 

This salad tastes best up to 1 hour after making it. 
To make ahead store the salad components separately 
(up to 3 hours), and toss before serving. 

1 English cucumber or 3 Kirby cucumbers, 
halved lengthwise, seeded, and thinly 
sliced 


4 large radishes (about 6 ounces), 
thinly sliced 


Zest of 1 lemon, plus 2 tablespoons fresh 

lemon juice (1 lemon total) 

6 ounces feta cheese, coarsely crumbled 
(about 11/2 cups) 


2 tablespoons white-wine vinegar 

1 tablespoon finely chopped fresh dill, 
plus more, torn, for garnish 


1/2 teaspoon sugar 

1 garlic clove, crushed with the flat side 
of a large knife 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
1/4 cup plus 1 tablespoon olive oil 


1. Put the cucumber, radishes, and lemon zest in a 
medium bowl. Add the cheese. 
2. Make the vinaigrette: Whisk together the lemon 
juice, vinegar, dill, sugar, and garlic in another 
medium bowl; season with salt and pepper. Whisk 
until the sugar has dissolved. Whisk in the oil in a 
slow, steady stream until emulsified. 
3. Add the vinaigrette to the cucumber mixture; toss 
well. Garnish with the dill. Discard the garlic clove 
before serving. Refrigerate the salad in an airtight 
container up to 1 hour. 
SALADS 167 


quinoa and apple salad 
with curry dressing 

SERVES 4 

1/4 cup raw whole almonds 

1 cup white quinoa 

1 teaspoon honey 

1 tablespoon finely chopped shallot 

1 teaspoon curry powder 

1/4 teaspoon coarse salt 
2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 


Freshly ground pepper 
2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 


2 tablespoons dried currants 

1 small McIntosh apple, cut into  thick 
wedges 


1/4 cup loosely packed fresh mint leaves, 
coarsely chopped, plus more for garnish 


1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Spread the almonds 
on a rimmed baking sheet; toast in the oven until 
lightly toasted and fragrant, about 7 minutes. Let 
cool; coarsely chop the nuts. 
2. Rinse the quinoa thoroughly in a fine sieve; drain. 
Bring 2 cups water to a boil in a medium saucepan. 
Add the quinoa; return to a boil. Stir the quinoa, 
cover, and reduce heat. Simmer until the quinoa is 
tender but still chewy, about 15 minutes. Fluff the 
quinoa with a fork; let cool. 
3. Whisk together the honey, shallot, curry powder, 
salt, and lemon juice in a large bowl. Season with 
pepper. Whisking constantly, pour in the oil in a 
slow, steady stream; whisk until the dressing is 
emulsified. Add the quinoa, currants, apple, mint, 
and nuts; toss well. Garnish with mint. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 304 CALORIES, 

14 G FAT, 0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 38 G CARBOHYDRATE, 

154 MG SODIUM, 8 G PROTEIN, 5 G FIBER 





classic creamy coleslaw 

SERVES 6 TO 8 

1 tablespoon Dijon mustard 

1 tablespoon cider vinegar 

1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice 

1 tablespoon sugar 

1 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/2 cup mayonnaise 
1/4 cup sour cream 

1 small green cabbage (about 13/4 pounds), 
finely shredded 


2 medium carrots, cut into  -thick 
matchsticks or coarsely grated 


1/2 small onion, coarsely grated (optional) 

168 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


1. Whisk together the mustard, vinegar, lemon juice, 
sugar, salt, mayonnaise, and sour cream in a small 
bowl. Refrigerate the dressing, covered, until ready 
to use, or up to 2 days. 
2. Put the cabbage, carrots, and onion (if desired) 
in a large bowl. Pour in the dressing, and toss thoroughly. 
Refrigerate, covered, until the slaw begins 
to soften, 1 to 2 hours. If not using immediately, refrigerate, 
covered, up to 2 days. Just before serving, 
toss the coleslaw again. 










italian potato salad 

SERVES 10 

8 large eggs 

3 pounds small red potatoes 
Coarse salt 


2 to 3 tablespoons muscatel wine vinegar or 
white balsamic vinegar 

1 cup loosely packed fresh flat-leaf parsley 
leaves, coarsely chopped 

1 medium red onion, coarsely chopped 
(about 3/4 cup) 


1/4 cup best-quality extra-virgin olive oil 

Freshly ground pepper 

1. Prepare an ice-water bath; set aside. Cover the 
eggs with water in a medium saucepan; bring to a 
full boil. After 1 minute, cover; turn off heat. Let 
stand 8 minutes. Rinse; transfer to ice-water bath. 
2. Cover the potatoes with water by 1 inch in a large 
saucepan. Bring to a boil; add salt. Simmer until just 
tender, about 15 minutes (do not overcook). Drain 
the potatoes; let cool slightly. Halve lengthwise. 
3. Transfer the potatoes to a medium bowl. Add 
vinegar to taste; gently toss. Stir in the parsley and 
onion. Gently tossing, pour in the oil in a slow, 
steady stream; toss until incorporated. Season with 
salt and pepper. 
4. Just before serving, peel and quarter the eggs, 
and arrange them on top of the salad. 
red and green cabbage 
slaw with bacon 

SERVES 6 TO 8 

This slaw can be made up to 1 day ahead and refrigerated. 
Refrigerate the cooked bacon separately, 
wrapped in paper towels, in a resealable 
plastic bag; reheat it on a baking sheet in a 325 degrees F 
oven until it's warm and crisp. 

1/2 medium red cabbage (about 1 pound), 
finely shredded 


1/4 medium green cabbage (about 1/2 pound), 
finely shredded 


1/2 pound smoked bacon (about 8 strips), cut 
into   pieces 


1 teaspoon caraway seeds (optional) 
3 tablespoons olive oil 


1 garlic clove, minced 
1/4 cup plus 3 tablespoons cider vinegar 


2 teaspoons sugar 
21/2 teaspoons coarse salt 

Freshly ground pepper 
1 Granny Smith apple (optional) 


1. Toss the cabbages together in a large bowl; set 
aside. Cook the bacon in a medium skillet over 
medium heat, stirring occasionally, until crisp, 
about 5 minutes. Transfer with a slotted spoon to 
paper towels to drain; set aside. Pour off all but 
about 1 tablespoon fat from the skillet. 
2. Add the caraway seeds to the skillet, if desired; 
cook over medium heat, shaking the skillet often, 
until the seeds begin to pop, about 1 minute. Add 
the oil and garlic; cook, stirring, 10 seconds (do not 
let the garlic brown). Remove from heat; pour in the 
vinegar. Add the sugar and salt; stir until dissolved. 
Pour the dressing over the cabbage. Season with 
pepper. Toss thoroughly. Let stand at least 1 hour, 
or refrigerate, covered, overnight. 
3. Just before serving, cut the apple into  thick 
wedges or matchsticks. Add to the dressed 
cabbage along with the bacon, and toss again. 
SALADS 169 


fingerling potato salad 
with sugar snap peas 

SERVES 4 TO 6 

11/2 pounds fingerling or other small potatoes, 
cut into  -thick rounds 

Coarse salt 

8 ounces sugar snap peas, plus more, 
split, for garnish (optional) 


1/2 small red onion, thinly sliced 

Creamy Tarragon Vinaigrette (recipe 
follows) 
Freshly ground pepper 

Fresh tarragon and tarragon flowers, 
for garnish (optional) 

1. Cover the potatoes with cold water by 2 inches 
in a medium saucepan. Bring to a boil; add 3 tablespoons 
salt. Reduce heat to medium-high; simmer 
the potatoes until tender, about 8 minutes. 
Transfer to paper towels to drain. 
2. Bring another medium saucepan of water to a 
boil; add 2 tablespoons salt. Blanch the snap peas 
until just tender, 1 to 2 minutes. Let cool in an ice-
water bath. Drain, and pat dry. 
3. Toss the potatoes, snap peas, onion, and vinaigrette 
in a bowl. Season with salt and pepper. Garnish 
with the split snap peas, tarragon, and tarragon 
flowers, if desired. 
creamy tarragon vinaigrette 

MAKES ABOUT 1 CUP 

2 teaspoons tarragon vinegar 

3/4 teaspoon Dijon mustard 
coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
1/2 cup extra-virgin olive oil 


1/2 cup sour cream 

2 tablespoons finely chopped fresh 
tarragon 


Stir together vinegar and mustard; season with salt 
and pepper. Pour in olive oil in a slow, steady 
stream, whisking until emulsified. Stir in sour cream 
and tarragon. 

wheatberry salad 

SERVES 8 

Wheatberries are a nutty grain often used in salads 
and breads. Look for hard red winter wheatberries-
summer wheatberries become too soft 
after they're cooked. 

2 cups hard red winter wheatberries (about 
13 ounces) 

2 tablespoons plus 1/2 cup extra-virgin 
olive oil 


1 cup diced red onion (1 small onion) 
1/2 cup balsamic vinegar 


1/2 cup sliced scallions


1 small red bell pepper, seeded and cut 
into   dice (1 cup) 


1 small yellow bell pepper, seeded and 
cut into   dice (1 cup) 


1 cup diced carrots (2 carrots) 
1/2 teaspoon salt 


1/2 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper 

1. Bring a medium saucepan of water to a boil. Add 
the wheatberries; cook until tender, 30 to 40 minutes. 
Drain; set aside. 
2. Heat 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large saute pan 
over low heat. Cook the onion until translucent, stirring 
occasionally, about 10 minutes. Remove the 
pan from heat; add remaining 1/2 cup olive oil and 
balsamic vinegar. 
3. In a large bowl, combine the wheatberries, onion 
mixture, scallions, peppers, carrots, salt, and pepper. 
Allow to sit for at least 1 hour at room temperature 
so the wheatberries absorb the flavors. Serve 
at room temperature. 
170 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


black-eyed pea 
and jalapeno salad 

SERVES 4 

Piquant jalapeno chiles complement the earthy 
flavor of black-eyed peas in this fiber-rich side 
salad; they also add crunch, along with the diced 
red onion. 

2 cans (15 ounces each) black-eyed peas, 
drained, rinsed, and excess water 
shaken out 


2 fresh jalapeno peppers, seeds and 
ribs discarded, flesh cut into   dice 


1 small red onion, cut into   dice 

3/4 cup sprouts, such as sunflower or alfalfa 
1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil 
2 tablespoons red-wine vinegar 

Coarse salt and freshly ground black 
pepper 

Put the black-eyed peas, jalapenos, onion, and 
sprouts in a large bowl. Add the oil and vinegar, and 
toss well. Season with salt and pepper. 

vidalia onion slaw 

SERVES 10 TO 12 

2 tablespoons plus 11/2 teaspoons coarse 
salt 


4 Vidalia or other sweet onions, cut into


11/2 cups mayonnaise 

1/4 cup apple cider vinegar 
1 tablespoon sugar 


1 teaspoon ground celery seed 
1/2 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 


1. Prepare a large ice-water bath; set aside. Bring a 
stockpot of water to a boil; add 2 tablespoons salt 
and the onions; simmer until the onions are translucent 
but still crisp, about 4 minutes. Transfer to the 
ice bath to cool. Drain; pat dry with paper towels. 
2. Transfer to a large bowl, and mix with the mayonnaise, 
vinegar, sugar, celery seed, remaining 11/2 
teaspoons salt, and pepper. Serve, or store, covered 
with plastic wrap, in the refrigerator up to 2 days. 
crunchy jicama, apple, 
and carrot slaw with creamy 
orange dressing 


SERVES 8 

1 cup mayonnaise 

1/2 cup sour cream 
1/4 cup fresh orange juice 


2 tablespoons cider vinegar 

1 tablespoon minced fresh basil 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
2 Granny Smith apples 


1 jicama (about 1 pound), peeled 

2 carrots 

1/2 small head green cabbage, finely 
shredded 


1. In a small bowl, whisk together the mayonnaise, 
sour cream, orange juice, vinegar, and basil; season 
with salt and pepper. Refrigerate, covered, until 
ready to use. 
2. Slice the apples, jicama, and carrots on the 
thinnest setting of a mandoline or with a sharp 
knife; then cut the slices into julienne, about 2 
inches long. 
3. In a large bowl, toss the julienned apples, jicama, 
carrots, and cabbage with the mayonnaise mixture. 
Cover with plastic wrap, and refrigerate until ready 
to serve. 
SALADS 171 


beet, cabbage, and carrot slaw 
with caraway seeds 

SERVES 6 

1 teaspoon caraway seeds 

2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 

1 tablespoon white or yellow miso paste 

1 small shallot, halved lengthwise and 
thinly sliced into half-moons 


2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
Freshly ground pepper 


21/2 cups julienned or grated beets (about 2) 
2 cups finely shredded red cabbage 
(1/4 medium) 

11/2 cups julienned or grated carrots (about 3) 

1. Make the dressing: In a small bowl, combine the 
caraway, lemon juice, miso, and shallot. Slowly 
whisk in the oil until emulsified. Season with pepper. 
Set aside. 
2. In a large bowl, combine the beets, cabbage, and 
carrots. Drizzle dressing over the vegetables, and 
toss until combined. Serve chilled or at room 
temperature. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 79 CALORIES, 5 G FAT, 

0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 8 G CARBOHYDRATE, 172 MG SODIUM, 

2 G PROTEIN, 3 G FIBER 

broccoli and white bean salad 

SERVES 4 

1 large bunch broccoli (about 1 pound) 

Coarse salt 

1 can (151/2 ounces) cannellini beans, 
drained and rinsed 


1/2 small red onion, halved and thinly sliced 
into half-moons 


1 tablespoon freshly squeezed lemon juice, 
plus 1 tablespoon finely grated lemon zest 
(about 1 lemon) 

2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

1/4 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes 
Freshly ground black pepper 


3/4 cup shaved Pecorino Romano or 
Parmesan cheese (about 2 ounces) 
1. Cut the tops off each head of broccoli, and trim 
into   florets; set aside. Peel each stem to remove 
the tough outer layer. Slice the peeled stems 
on the bias into   pieces; set aside. 
2. Prepare an ice-water bath; set aside. Bring a large 
pot of water to a boil. Add a generous amount of 
salt and the broccoli florets. Cook over high heat 
until the florets are tender when pierced with the 
tip of a paring knife, about 4 minutes. Using a slotted 
spoon, transfer to the ice bath. Add the stems 
to the boiling water; cook until tender when pierced 
with the tip of a paring knife, about 3 minutes. 
Transfer to the ice bath. Let the florets and stems 
cool completely, and drain. 
3. In a large mixing bowl, combine the broccoli, 
beans, onion, lemon juice and zest, oil, and red pepper 
flakes. Stir to combine; season with salt and pepper. 
Top with cheese; serve immediately. 
172 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


warm bean, snap pea, 
and tomato salad 

SERVES 4 

Cannellini are white Italian kidney beans. Try 
substituting cranberry, pinto, or other dried 
beans in this salad. To save time, use canned 
beans in place of dried. 

4 ounces wax beans, trimmed and cut into 
  pieces (about 1 cup) 


4 ounces sugar snap peas, trimmed and cut 
in half (about 1 cup) 

1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil 
4 scallions, sliced into   rounds 


3 garlic cloves, minced 
11/2 cups cooked cannellini beans, drained 

2 beefsteak tomatoes, cut into   dice, 
juice and seeds reserved 


1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 
Freshly ground black pepper 


1 cup loosely packed fresh basil leaves 

1. Prepare an ice-water bath; set aside. Bring a 
medium pot of water to a boil over high heat. Add 
the wax beans, and cook until crisp-tender and 
bright, about 21/2 minutes. Remove the beans with 
a slotted spoon, and immediately plunge into the 
ice bath. Drain, and set aside. Repeat with the snap 
peas, blanching them about 1 minute. 
2. Heat the oil in a large saute pan over medium 
heat. Add the scallions and garlic; cook, stirring occasionally, 
until soft but not browned, about 3 minutes. 
Add the cannellini beans, and cook until just 
heated through, about 2 minutes more. 
3. Transfer the mixture to a large bowl. Add the wax 
beans, snap peas, tomatoes and reserved juice and 
seeds, and salt. Season with pepper. Using a sharp 
knife, cut the basil into very thin strips; add to the 
bean mixture. Toss to combine; serve warm. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 177 CALORIES,4GFAT, 

0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 28 G CARBOHYDRATE, 255 MG SODIUM, 

9 G PROTEIN, 11 G FIBER 

corn and couscous salad 

SERVES 4 

1 teaspoon curry powder 
2 teaspoons grainy mustard 
1 tablespoon white-wine or sherry vinegar 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
4 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 


3/4 cup couscous 
1 Vidalia or other sweet onion, diced 
3 garlic cloves, minced 
1 red chile, minced (optional) 
3 cups fresh corn kernels (about 4 cobs) 
1/4 cup finely chopped fresh cilantro 

1. In a medium bowl, whisk together the curry powder, 
mustard, and vinegar. Season with salt and pepper. 
While whisking, slowly drizzle in 3 tablespoons 
oil; whisk until emulsified. Set aside. 
2. Place the couscous in a large bowl. Bring 1 cup 
water to a boil; pour over the couscous; stir to combine. 
Cover with a plate; let steam until the water 
is absorbed, about 5 minutes. Fluff with a fork; 
set aside. 
3. Heat the remaining tablespoon oil in a large skillet 
over medium heat. Add the onion, and cook, stirring, 
until softened, about 4 minutes. Stir in the 
garlic and chile; cook, stirring, until softened, about 
2 minutes. Add the corn, and cook until bright yellow 
and just tender, about 2 minutes. Stir the corn 
mixture into the couscous. Add the curry vinaigrette 
and cilantro; toss to combine. Serve warm or 
at room temperature. 
SALADS 173 


lentils with tarragon, 
shallots, and beets 

SERVES 8 TO 10 

To prevent the lentils from becoming too soft as 
they cool, spread them on a baking sheet. 

31/2 pounds beets, trimmed 

2 tablespoons plus 1/4 cup extra-virgin 
olive oil 


31/2 teaspoons coarse salt, plus more for 
seasoning 

1/4 cup water, plus more for cooking lentils 

1 pound French green lentils, picked over 

2 garlic cloves 

2 dried bay leaves 

1 shallot, minced 

1 teaspoon Dijon mustard 
2 tablespoons plus 1 teaspoon balsamic 
vinegar 
1 tablespoon chopped fresh tarragon 


Freshly ground pepper 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. In a medium bowl, toss 
the beets with 2 tablespoons oil and 11/2 teaspoons 
salt. Arrange on a rimmed baking sheet; pour 1/4 cup 
water into the pan. Cover with foil; roast until the 
beets are easily pierced with the tip of a knife, 45 to 
60 minutes. Remove from the oven; let cool. Peel 
and cut into   cubes. 
2. Meanwhile, combine the lentils, garlic, and bay 
leaves in a 6-quart saucepan; add enough cold water 
to cover by about 3 inches. Bring to a boil over 
medium-high heat. Reduce heat to medium-low; 
simmer, stirring occasionally, until the lentils are 
tender but not mushy, 10 to 20 minutes. Stir in the 
remaining 2 teaspoons salt, and cook about 5 minutes 
more. Drain in a colander; let cool. 
3. In a small bowl, combine the shallot, mustard, 
and vinegar; let stand 15 minutes. Slowly whisk in 
the remaining 1/4 cup oil in a steady stream. 
4. Transfer the lentils to a large serving bowl. Add 
the vinaigrette and the tarragon; toss well to combine. 
Toss in the beets. Season with salt and pepper. 
Serve, or cover and refrigerate up to 4 hours; 
bring to room temperature before serving. 
french potato salad with 
white wine and celery leaves 

SERVES 6 

21/2 pounds Yukon Gold potatoes 

Coarse salt 
3 tablespoons roughly chopped shallots 


2 tablespoons white wine 
2 tablespoons white-wine vinegar 


Freshly ground pepper 
3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 


1/3 cup loosely packed celery leaves from 
inner stalks, torn in half 


1. Place the potatoes in a stockpot, and add enough 
cold water to cover by 4 inches. Bring to a boil over 
high heat, and add salt; reduce heat, and cook until 
the potatoes are easily pierced with a fork, about 20 
minutes. Drain; let cool slightly. Peel the potatoes, 
and cut into quarters or eighths. 
2. Meanwhile, in a large serving bowl, combine the 
shallots with the wine and vinegar. While still warm, 
add the potatoes to the bowl; season with salt and 
pepper. Drizzle in the oil; toss to coat. Sprinkle with 
the celery leaves, and serve immediately. 
174 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


multicolored pepper 
and bean salad with ricotta 
salata and herbs 


SERVES 10 TO 12 

You can prepare the vegetables up to 2 hours before 
serving and keep them covered in the refrigerator. 
If desired, include some poblano or other 
chiles along with the peppers. You can substitute 
feta cheese for the ricotta salata. 

Coarse salt 

1/2 pound green beans, ends trimmed 
1/2 pound yellow wax beans, ends trimmed 


3 shallots, peeled and thinly sliced into
half-moons (about 3/4 cup) 


1/4 cup capers, rinsed and drained (optional) 
3 tablespoons sherry vinegar 


5 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

3 pounds assorted bell peppers, quartered, 
seeds and ribs removed 


Freshly ground black pepper 
1/2 cup loosely packed fresh basil leaves 


1/2 cup loosely packed fresh mint leaves 
6 to 7 ounces fresh ricotta salata cheese 


1. Prepare a large ice-water bath; set aside. Fill a 
stockpot with water; bring to a boil, and add a generous 
amount of salt. Add the green beans and wax 
beans to the boiling water, and cook just until they 
are crisp-tender and their color brightens, 3 to 4 
minutes. Transfer the beans to the ice bath to stop 
the cooking and to preserve the color. Drain, and 
pat dry with paper towels. Slice the larger beans in 
half lengthwise. Set aside in a large bowl. 
2. Make the vinaigrette: In a small bowl, combine 
the shallots, capers (if using), vinegar, and a pinch 
of salt; let stand 15 minutes. Whisking constantly, 
slowly add the olive oil. 
3. Meanwhile, slice the peppers as thinly as possible 
using a sharp knife or mandoline. Add to the 
bowl with the beans. Drizzle with the vinaigrette, 
and toss to combine; season with salt and black pepper. 
Just before serving, tear the basil and mint 
leaves into small pieces, and crumble the ricotta 
salata. Stir the herbs and cheese into the salad. 
orzo salad with 
roasted carrots and dill 


SERVES 8 TO 10 

3 pounds carrots (about 4 bunches) 

4 garlic cloves, unpeeled 
1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil 


Coarse salt 
1 pound orzo 


Grated zest and juice of 2 lemons 

4 scallions, white and light-green parts, 
roughly chopped 


1/2 cup loosely packed fresh dill, 
roughly chopped 


Freshly ground pepper 

1. Preheat the oven to 450 degrees F with a rack in the lower 
shelf. Cut the carrots diagonally into   pieces. 
On a rimmed baking sheet, toss the carrots and garlic 
with 2 tablespoons oil and a pinch of salt. Roast 
until the carrots are tender and browned, about 15 
minutes. Transfer the sheet to a wire rack to cool. 
Squeeze the garlic cloves from their skins; mince 
to form a coarse paste. Set aside. 
2. Bring a large saucepan of water to a boil; add salt. 
Stir in the orzo; cook until al dente, according to 
package instructions, about 7 minutes. Drain; while 
still hot, transfer the orzo to a large bowl, and toss 
with the remaining 2 tablespoons oil. Let cool 
slightly, and add the roasted carrots. 
3. Meanwhile, in a small bowl, mix together the 
lemon zest, lemon juice, scallions, and roasted garlic. 
Add the dill, and pour the mixture over the orzo 
mixture. Stir to combine; season with salt and pepper. 
Serve, or store, covered with plastic wrap, in the 
refrigerator up to 1 day; bring to room temperature 
before serving. 
SALADS 175 


spicy asian slaw 

SERVES 6 TO 8 

for the dressing 

1 cup mayonnaise 

2 tablespoons toasted sesame oil 

2 tablespoons mirin or rice wine vinegar 

1/4 cup chili sauce 

3 tablespoons fresh lime juice 

1 tablespoon grated ginger 

1 teaspoon coarse salt 

1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 

2 teaspoons sesame seeds 

for the slaw 

1/2 small head red cabbage (about 1 pound) 

1/2 head napa cabbage (about 1 pound) 

1 turnip, peeled (about 9 ounces) 

1 small daikon, peeled (about 8 ounces) 

1 large carrot, peeled 

4 scallions, thinly sliced on the diagonal 

1 red bell pepper, seeded and thinly sliced 

1/4 cup finely chopped fresh mint leaves 

1/4 cup finely chopped fresh cilantro 

1. Make the dressing: In a medium bowl, whisk together 
the mayonnaise, sesame oil, vinegar, chili 
sauce, lime juice, ginger, salt, pepper, and sesame 
seeds; set the dressing aside. 
2. Make the slaw: Core the red and napa cabbages, 
quarter, and slice very thinly. Transfer to a large 
bowl. Fill the bowl with cold water to cover the cabbage. 
Swish the cabbage around with your hands 
so any dirt settles to the bottom of the bowl. Lift the 
cabbage, and transfer to a colander to drain. Place 
in a large bowl; set aside. 
3. Using the large holes of a box grater, grate the 
turnip, daikon, and carrot. Add to the bowl of cabbage 
along with the scallions, red bell pepper, mint, 
and cilantro. Add the reserved dressing, and toss to 
combine. Cover with plastic wrap, and let sit at least 
2 hours in the refrigerator, but preferably overnight. 
Serve chilled. The slaw will keep in refrigerator for 
up to 4 days. 
tomato and 
corn tabbouleh salad 


SERVES 8 

1 cup bulghur wheat 

3 cups boiling water 

6 ears corn 

1/2 cup extra-virgin olive oil 
2 teaspoons coarse salt, or to taste 


1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper, 
or to taste 


2 garlic cloves, or to taste, minced 

Juice of 4 limes 
4 large ripe tomatoes, diced 


1/2 cup loosely packed fresh mint, 
finely chopped 


1/2 cup loosely packed fresh flat-leaf parsley, 
finely chopped 


1/4 cup fresh chives, cut into small pieces 

1. In a bowl, cover the bulghur with the boiling 
water. Let stand 45 minutes. Drain well; return to a 
bowl. Set aside. 
2. Place the corn on a cutting board, and, using a 
sharp knife, carefully cut the kernels from the cob, 
taking care the corn does not roll as you work. Heat 
2 tablespoons olive oil in a large saute pan over 
medium heat. Add one-third of the corn, season 
with salt and pepper, and cook, stirring, until the 
corn is caramelized and golden, about 7 minutes. 
One minute before the corn is done, add one-third 
of the minced garlic, and mix with the corn. Transfer 
the corn to a baking pan to cool. When the corn 
is finished, deglaze the pan with a little lime juice; 
stir, using a wooden spoon, to loosen any browned 
bits on the bottom of the pan. Add to the corn. Repeat 
with the remaining corn 2 more times. Set 
aside for the corn to cool. 
3. Combine the bulghur with the remaining 2 tablespoons 
oil, tomatoes, remaining lime juice, mint, 
parsley, and chives. Add the corn; mix well. Chill 30 
minutes before serving. Adjust the seasoning with 
salt and pepper. 
176 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


celery root remoulade 
(celeri remoulade) 

SERVES 6 

Traditional remoulade is made with mayonnaise. 
We have lightened this traditional side dish with 
a lemony yogurt dressing. 

1 medium celery root, about 12 ounces 

1 Granny Smith apple 
Juice of 1 lemon, about 2 tablespoons 


1/2 cup nonfat plain yogurt 
2 tablespoons heavy cream 


4 teaspoons Dijon mustard 
1 teaspoon coarse salt 


1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 

1. Peel the celery root; core the apple. Grate both 
on the large holes of a box grater. Place in a medium 
bowl, and toss with the lemon juice. 
2. In another bowl, whisk together the yogurt, 
cream, Dijon, salt, and pepper. Add to the grated 
celery root and apple, and toss to combine. Refrigerate 
until ready to serve. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 61 CALORIES, 2 G FAT, 

7 MG CHOLESTEROL, 9 G CARBOHYDRATE, 454 MG SODIUM, 

2 G PROTEIN, 3 G FIBER 

green papaya salad 

SERVES 8 

If you can't find Vietnamese coriander, you can 
use fresh cilantro. 

for the dressing 

1 fresh red Thai chile, finely chopped 

2 tablespoons Asian fish sauce 
2 tablespoons sugar 


Juice of 1 lime 

for the salad 

2 pounds green (unripe) papaya, peeled 
and seeded 


12 sprigs fresh Vietnamese coriander, leaves 
and stems separated and stems coarsely 
chopped, plus 1 sprig for garnish 


1. Make the dressing: Stir together chile, fish sauce, 
sugar, lime juice, and 3 tablespoons water in a 
medium bowl. 
2. Make the salad: Thickly shred papaya with a 
mandoline or box grater. Transfer to a large bowl. 
Stir in coriander leaves and chopped stems. To 
serve, drizzle salad with dressing, and toss to combine. 
Garnish with a sprig of coriander. 
radicchio-cabbage slaw 
with honey 

SERVES 4 

3 tablespoons honey 

3 tablespoons sherry vinegar 
1 teaspoon coarse salt 


1/3 cup extra-virgin olive oil 
Freshly ground pepper 


1 medium head napa cabbage (about 
1 pound), halved lengthwise, then cut 
crosswise into  -thick strips 


2 small heads radicchio (about 8 ounces), 
halved lengthwise, then cut crosswise into 
 -thick strips 

1. Whisk together honey, vinegar, and salt in a small 
bowl. Add oil in a slow, steady stream, whisking 
until well blended. Season with pepper. 
2. Toss together cabbage and radicchio in a large 
bowl. Add dressing; toss to combine. Cover, and refrigerate 
at least 5 minutes. Just before serving, toss 
again. The slaw can be refrigerated in an airtight 
container up to 1 day. 
SALADS 177 


MAIN COURSE SALADS 


asian steak salad 
with spicy vinaigrette 

SERVES 4 

In this nutritious salad, papaya, red bell pepper, 
and cabbage provide vitamins A and C, while 
carrots contribute large amounts of beta 
carotene. Cilantro and mint supply flavonoids, 
and peanuts add vitamin E and selenium, all potent 
antioxidants. 

for the marinade 

Juice and grated zest of 1 lime 
1 tablespoon grated fresh ginger 


1 garlic clove, minced 

1 scallion, white and light-green parts only, 
sliced into   rounds 

for the salad 

12 ounces flank steak 

Freshly ground black pepper 

1 red bell pepper, stem and seeds removed, 
julienned 

2 carrots, peeled and julienned 

1 head napa cabbage, tough outer leaves 
removed, julienned 


1 papaya, peeled, seeds removed, cut into 
  pieces 


1/4 cup fresh cilantro leaves, packed 
1/4 cup fresh mint leaves, packed 


1 cup bean sprouts (optional) 
Spicy Vinaigrette (recipe follows) 


2 tablespoons chopped toasted peanuts, 
for garnish 


1. Prepare the marinade: Place the lime juice, zest, 
ginger, garlic, and scallion in a small bowl, and 
whisk to combine. Place the steak in a shallow dish; 
cover with the marinade, turning to completely coat. 
Transfer to the refrigerator, and marinate 1 hour. 
2. Remove the steak from the refrigerator 30 minutes 
before cooking; let sit at room temperature. 
Heat a grill or grill pan over medium-high heat. Remove 
the steak from the marinade, and season with 
black pepper. Sear the steak until browned on the 
outside and cooked to desired doneness inside, 5 
to 6 minutes on each side for medium-rare. Transfer 
to a cutting board; let cool slightly, and thinly 
slice on the bias. 
3. In a large bowl, combine the red bell pepper, carrots, 
cabbage, papaya, cilantro, mint, and bean 
sprouts, if using. Drizzle with the vinaigrette, and 
toss well to combine. Arrange the vegetables and 
steak on 4 serving plates. Garnish each serving with 
11/2 teaspoons chopped peanuts. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 323 CALORIES, 

19 G FAT, 44 MG CHOLESTEROL, 20 G CARBOHYDRATE, 

245 MG SODIUM, 21 G PROTEIN, 5 G FIBER 

spicy vinaigrette 

MAKES 1/2 CUP 

Sesame oil is a good source of vitamin E. 

Juice and grated zest of 2 limes 
2 tablespoons sesame oil 


2 tablespoons water 
2 tablespoons rice-wine vinegar 


11/2 tablespoons grated fresh ginger 
1 garlic clove, minced 

1 teaspoon crumbled dried chile pepper or 
red pepper flakes 


1/4 teaspoon coarse salt 

Combine all the ingredients in a small bowl, and 
whisk to combine. 

FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 68 CALORIES, 7 G FAT, 

0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 2 G CARBOHYDRATE, 121 MG SODIUM, 

0 G PROTEIN, 0 G FIBER 

178 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


chicken salad with mango 
and mint on flatbread 

SERVES 6 

1/4 cup fresh lime juice (2 to 3 limes) 

1/4 cup fresh lemon juice (about 2 lemons) 
3 tablespoons canola oil 


2 tablespoons soy sauce 

1 tablespoon honey 

12 mint leaves, roughly chopped 

1 piece (1 inch) peeled fresh ginger, finely 
grated 


2 whole boneless, skinless chicken breasts 
Coarse salt 


6 ounces sugar snap peas, trimmed 
4 cups arugula, trimmed (about 41/2 ounces) 

4 ounces pea shoots 
Freshly ground pepper 


1 small mango, peeled, pitted, and cut 
into matchsticks 


1 small jicama, peeled and cut into 
matchsticks 


6 soft lavash (or other soft flatbread) 

1. Make the dressing: Blend the lime juice, lemon 
juice, oil, soy sauce, honey, mint, and ginger in a 
blender until smooth. Set aside. 
2. Put the chicken in a medium stockpot, and cover 
with water by 1 inch. Bring to a boil. Reduce heat. 
Simmer the chicken until cooked through, 10 to 12 
minutes. 
3. Transfer the chicken to a bowl. Let cool slightly. 
Shred the chicken with your fingers; transfer to a 
bowl. Reserve 2 tablespoons dressing; add the remaining 
dressing to the chicken. Toss well. 
4. Prepare an ice-water bath. Bring a medium 
saucepan of water to a boil; add salt. Cook the sugar 
snap peas until crisp-tender, about 30 seconds. Transfer 
to the ice-water bath to stop the cooking. Drain. 
5. Put the sugar snap peas, arugula, and pea shoots 
into a medium bowl. Add remaining 2 tablespoons 
dressing; toss. Season with salt and pepper. 
6. Add the mango and jicama to the chicken; toss 
well. Season with salt and pepper. 
7. Arrange the arugula mixture over each lavash, 
dividing evenly. Top with the chicken salad. Roll up 
the lavash to enclose the filling. Cut in half diagonally, 
and serve. 
shrimp salad with peas 
and chervil vinaigrette 

SERVES 4 TO 6 

You can use tarragon in place of chervil. 

3 tablespoons fresh chervil leaves, coarsely 
chopped, plus more for garnish 

1 garlic clove, finely grated 

Finely grated zest of 1 lemon, 
plus 3 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 
(1 lemon total) 

3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
1/4 teaspoon coarse salt 


Freshly ground pepper 
18 medium shrimp, peeled and deveined, 
tails left intact 
1 cup frozen petit peas, thawed 


8 ounces snow peas, trimmed and cut 
lengthwise diagonally into thin strips 


1. Preheat the broiler. Make the vinaigrette: Whisk 
together the chervil, garlic, lemon zest, lemon juice, 
oil, and salt in a small bowl; season with pepper. 
2. Toss the shrimp with 1 tablespoon vinaigrette. 
Place the shrimp on a rimmed baking sheet lined 
with foil; broil until cooked through, 3 to 4 minutes. 
Let cool completely. Refrigerate in an airtight container 
until ready to use, up to 2 hours. 
3. Combine the peas, snow peas, shrimp, and remaining 
vinaigrette; toss. Refrigerate in an airtight 
container (or store in a chilled cooler) until ready 
to serve, up to 3 hours. Toss before serving. 
SALADS 179 


minestrone salad 

SERVES 4 

1 teaspoon coarse salt, plus more 
for seasoning 


8 ounces gemelli or other pasta, 
such as penne or rotini 


4 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

1 small onion, cut into   dice 

2 garlic cloves, minced 

1 carrot, peeled and cut into   dice 
1 zucchini (about 6 ounces), cut into
4 ounces green beans, cut into   pieces 

11/4 cups corn kernels, cut from 1 ear, or frozen 
Freshly ground pepper 

2 tablespoons balsamic vinegar 

1 15-ounce can cannellini beans, rinsed and 
drained 

1 pound assorted tomatoes, roughly 
chopped 


1. Bring a medium saucepan of water to a boil. Add 
1 teaspoon salt to the boiling water. Add the gemelli, 
and cook until al dente, 8 to 10 minutes. Drain, and 
rinse under cold water; set aside. 
2. Heat 2 tablespoons olive oil in a large skillet over 
medium heat. Add the onion and garlic, and cook 
until they begin to soften, about 2 minutes. Add the 
carrot, and cook until it softens, about 4 minutes. 
Add the zucchini, green beans, and corn. Cook until 
the vegetables are tender, stirring occasionally, 10 
to 15 minutes more. Season with salt and pepper. 
Transfer to a medium bowl to cool. Stir in the remaining 
2 tablespoons olive oil, vinegar, beans, 
tomatoes, and reserved pasta. Season to taste with 
more salt and pepper, if desired. Serve chilled or 
at room temperature. 
thai beef salad 

SERVES 6 

6 tablespoons fresh lime juice (about 
3 limes) 


21/2 tablespoons Thai fish sauce (nam pla) 

1 fresh Thai or serrano chile, seeded and 
finely chopped (about 1 tablespoon) 


1 teaspoon sugar 

2 teaspoons finely chopped fresh cilantro 

2 teaspoons finely chopped fresh mint 
4 scallions, white and pale-green parts only, 
thinly sliced on the diagonal 
3 shallots, thinly sliced into rings 

3 Kirby cucumbers, peeled, halved 
lengthwise, and cut into  -thick 
half-moons 


12 ounces baby arugula (about 5 cups) 

2 tablespoons olive oil 

1 boneless sirloin steak (11/2 pounds) 

1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 
Freshly ground pepper 


1/2 cup unsalted peanuts, coarsely chopped 
(about 21/2 ounces) 


1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Make the dressing: 
Whisk together the lime juice, fish sauce, chile, and 
sugar in a small bowl until the sugar is dissolved. 
Stir in the cilantro and mint. Set aside. Toss together 
the scallions, shallots, cucumbers, and arugula in a 
large bowl; set aside. 
2. Heat the oil in a large ovenproof skillet over high 
heat until hot but not smoking. Sprinkle the steak 
all over with salt; season with pepper. Brown the 
steak, turning once, about 2 minutes per side. Transfer 
the skillet to the oven; cook the steak to desired 
doneness, about 6 minutes for medium-rare. 
3. Transfer the steak to a cutting board, and let 
stand at least 5 minutes. Cut the steak across the 
grain into  -thick slices. 
4. Add the steak to the salad. Drizzle with dressing, 
and toss. Sprinkle with peanuts. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 382 CALORIES, 26 G 

FAT, 63 MG CHOLESTEROL, 12 G CARBOHYDRATE, 712 MG 

SODIUM, 26 G PROTEIN, 3 G FIBER 

180 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


nicoise salad 

SERVES 6 

1 pound red fingerling or other small 
potatoes 


Coarse salt 

Garlic Vinaigrette (recipe follows) 

Freshly ground pepper 
4 large eggs 


1/2 pound green beans, halved crosswise 
1 head Boston lettuce 


1 red or green bell pepper, cut into  thick 
rings 


1/2 pound cherry tomatoes, halved 

1/2 English cucumber, peeled and sliced 

1/2 fennel bulb, trimmed, halved lengthwise, 
and very thinly sliced 


2 cans (6 ounces each) tuna


3/4 cup Nicoise or oil-cured black olives 
1 scallion, chopped 
2 tablespoons coarsely chopped fresh flat- 
leaf parsley 


1 tablespoon drained capers (optional) 

1. Bring the potatoes to a boil in a large saucepan 
of water. Add salt; reduce heat, and simmer until 
tender, 10 to 15 minutes. Drain; let cool slightly. 
2. Cut the potatoes into bite-size pieces; peel any 
loose skins. Dress with enough vinaigrette to coat 
lightly (reserve remainder). Season with salt and 
pepper. Set aside. 
3. Prepare an ice-water bath; set aside. Cover the 
eggs with water in a small saucepan; bring to a full 
boil. After 1 minute, cover and turn off heat. Let stand 
6 minutes. Rinse; transfer to the ice-water bath. 
4. Prepare another ice-water bath; set aside. Bring 
a medium saucepan of water to a boil; add salt. 
Blanch the green beans until crisp-tender, 1 to 2 
minutes. Drain; rinse with cold water. Let stand in 
the ice-water bath until cool. Drain; pat dry. 
5. Peel the eggs, and halve lengthwise. Arrange the 
lettuce and then the potatoes, green beans, bell pepper, 
tomatoes, cucumber, fennel, tuna, eggs, and 
olives on a platter. 
6. Sprinkle with scallion and parsley, and with capers 
if desired. Drizzle with vinaigrette, and serve 
with the remainder. 
garlic vinaigrette 

MAKES ABOUT 1 CUP 

1 garlic clove, lightly crushed with the flat 
side of a knife 


1 tablespoon Dijon mustard 
2 tablespoons red-wine vinegar 


2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


3/4 cup olive oil 
Put the garlic, mustard, vinegar, and lemon juice in 
a small bowl; season with salt and pepper; whisk 
until blended. Whisking constantly, pour in the oil 
in a slow, steady stream until emulsified. Let stand 
at least 30 minutes; discard the garlic. 

red romaine salad 
with walnuts and eggs 

SERVES 4 TO 6 

6 large eggs 

1 head red-leaf romaine, torn into pieces 
1 cup walnut halves, toasted 


Basic Vinaigrette (page 628) 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


1. Put the eggs in a medium saucepan of water; 
bring to a boil. After 2 minutes, cover; turn off heat. 
Let stand 6 minutes. Let cool in an ice-water bath. 
2. Drizzle the lettuce and walnuts in a bowl with 
5 tablespoons vinaigrette (or to taste); toss. Peel the 
eggs; halve. Serve on top of the salad. Season with 
salt and pepper. 
SALADS 181 


spicy chicken salad 
in lettuce cups 

SERVES 4 TO 6 

Ground, toasted rice adds crunch and a slight 
nuttiness to this salad. Thai basil, available at 
gourmet and farmers' markets, has a licorice flavor, 
but you can use regular basil instead. 

1 tablespoon jasmine rice or another long-
grain rice 


Coarse salt 

1 pound ground chicken 
Lime-Chile Dressing (recipe follows) 


1/4 cup chopped fresh Thai basil, plus 
more for garnish 


1/4 cup chopped fresh cilantro, plus more 
for garnish 


Freshly ground pepper 

1 head Boston lettuce, leaves separated 
1 carrot, peeled and cut into matchsticks 


1/2 daikon radish, peeled and cut into 
matchsticks 


3 tablespoons salted, roasted peanuts, 
chopped 


1. Toast the rice in a dry nonstick skillet over 
medium-high heat until deep golden, 1 to 2 minutes. 
Coarsely grind with a mortar and pestle or in 
a food processor. 
2. Bring a medium pot of water to a boil; add 1 tablespoon 
salt. Boil the chicken, separating it into 
pieces with a spoon, until cooked through, 3 to 4 
minutes. 
3. Transfer the chicken to a medium bowl with a 
slotted spoon; reserve 1/4 cup cooking liquid. Add 
the dressing, rice, herbs, and cooking liquid; toss. 
Season with salt and pepper. 
4. For each serving, put about 1/4 cup chicken in a 
lettuce leaf. Garnish with carrot, daikon, basil, 
cilantro, and nuts. 
lime-chile dressing 

MAKES ABOUT 1/2 CUP 

5 tablespoons fresh lime juice 

3 tablespoons Asian fish sauce 
2 tablespoons rice-wine vinegar 


1 tablespoon sugar 
2 fresh red hot chiles, finely chopped 


2 garlic cloves, minced 
2 shallots, thinly sliced 


2 tablespoons finely chopped fresh cilantro 

Stir together all ingredients except the cilantro, and 
let stand at least 15 minutes (and up to a day in 
the refrigerator). When ready to serve, stir in 
the cilantro. 

rice salad with rock 
shrimp and asparagus 

SERVES 4 

Rock shrimp are small and a bit sweet. You can 
also use small regular shrimp. 

Coarse salt 
1 bunch asparagus (about 1 pound), 
trimmed 
1 cup jasmine rice 


11/2 teaspoons toasted sesame chile oil 
2 teaspoons olive oil 

1 pound rock shrimp, peeled 

2 tablespoons plus 1 teaspoon fresh 
lemon juice 


Freshly ground pepper 
1/2 cup sliced almonds, toasted 


1 tablespoon freshly grated lemon zest 

1. Prepare an ice-water bath; set aside. Bring a 
medium pot of water to a boil; add a large pinch of 
salt. Blanch the asparagus until bright green and 
tender, about 3 minutes. Immediately transfer with 
tongs to the ice-water bath to stop the cooking. 
Drain well; pat dry. Cut the spears on the diagonal 
into thin pieces; set aside. 
2. Bring the rice and 11/2 cups water to a boil in a 
medium saucepan. Cover, and reduce heat to 
medium-low. Simmer until the liquid is absorbed 
and the rice is tender, about 10 minutes; set aside. 
182 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


3. Heat the sesame and olive oils in a large skillet 
over medium-high heat until hot but not smoking. 
Add the shrimp; stir to coat. Stir in the lemon juice, 
and season with salt and pepper; cook until the 
shrimp are pink and cooked through, about 3 minutes. 
Stir the shrimp, rice, asparagus, and almonds 
in a large bowl. Garnish with lemon zest. 
smoked mackerel, 
cucumber, and potato salad 
with mustard dressing 

SERVES 4 

Although fresh mackerel can be hard to find, 
smoked mackerel is often sold in the refrigerated 
section of supermarkets; it is also available from 
mail-order sources. We used the peppered variety, 
but any type will do. 

3/4 pound small waxy potatoes, such as 
fingerling or new potatoes 
1 small shallot, very thinly sliced 

4 teaspoons white-wine vinegar 
2 teaspoons Dijon mustard 


4 teaspoons olive oil 
2 tablespoons roughly chopped fresh dill 


1/2 cucumber, peeled, halved lengthwise, and 
sliced into   half-moons 


Freshly ground pepper 

12 ounces smoked mackerel, broken into bite- 
size pieces 


Handful of tender salad greens, such as 
arugula, watercress, or tatsoi 

1. Place the potatoes in a small saucepan, and cover 
with cold water. Bring to a boil; reduce heat, and 
simmer until tender when pierced with a fork, about 
12 minutes. Drain in a colander; let cool slightly. 
Slip off the skins; discard. Cut the potatoes into 
halves or quarters, if desired. 
2. Meanwhile, make the dressing: In a medium 
bowl, combine the shallot, vinegar, and mustard. 
Whisk in the oil until emulsified. Sprinkle the dill 
into the bowl. 
3. Add the cucumber and cooked potatoes to the 
dressing in the bowl; season with pepper. Toss to 
coat evenly. Divide the salad among 4 plates; 
arrange the mackerel on each. Serve, garnished with 
greens. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 234 CALORIES, 15 G FAT, 

15 MG CHOLESTEROL, 7 G CARBOHYDRATE, 800 MG SODIUM, 

20 G PROTEIN, 3 G FIBER 

frisee with lardons 
and poached eggs 

SERVES 4 AS AN APPETIZER 

2 tablespoons distilled white vinegar 

4 large eggs 

1 large head frisee (about 5 ounces), 
washed and spun dry 


6 ounces (about 4 slices) thick-cut bacon, 
cut into  -thick strips 


3 tablespoons finely chopped shallot 

1/4 cup red-wine vinegar 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


1. Bring a large, deep skillet of water to a boil. Reduce 
to a simmer; add the white vinegar. Fill a 
saucepan with warm water; set aside. Break an egg 
into a small bowl; holding the bowl just over the 
vinegar water, gently slide the egg into the water. 
Repeat with the remaining eggs. Poach about 2 minutes 
(longer for firm yolks). Use a slotted spoon to 
transfer the eggs to the pan of warm water. 
2. Place the frisee in a large bowl; set aside. Cook 
the bacon, stirring occasionally, in a medium saute 
pan over medium-high heat until golden brown, 
about 3 minutes. Add the shallot; cook 1 minute. 
Add the red-wine vinegar; bring to a boil, swirling 
to combine. Pour over the frisee. Season with salt 
and pepper; toss to coat evenly. 
3. Divide among 4 plates. Drain the eggs, and top 
each salad with one. Sprinkle the eggs with salt and 
pepper. Serve immediately. 
SALADS 183 


roasted chicken salad 

SERVES 6 

Use a store-bought roasted chicken to save time. 
To take this salad on a picnic, pack it in an airtight 
container and keep it fresh in a cooler. 

1 cup pecan halves (about 3 ounces), 
broken in half lengthwise 


1 whole roasted chicken (about 3 pounds), 
skin removed 


8 scallions, white and light-green parts 
only, trimmed and thinly sliced 


2 stalks celery, strings removed and thinly 
sliced 


8 ounces lady apples (about 4), or Fuji 
apples (about 2 medium), cored and 
sliced into bite-size pieces 


5 tablespoons golden or dark raisins 

1 tablespoon coarsely chopped fresh 
oregano leaves 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

Sour Cream Dressing (recipe follows) 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Spread the pecans in 
a single layer on a rimmed baking sheet. Toast in 
the oven until fragrant, stirring occasionally, about 
10 minutes. Remove pecans from the pan, and let 
cool completely. 
2. Pull the chicken from the bone; discard the bones, 
and cut the meat into   pieces. Transfer to a 
medium bowl; add the scallions, celery, apples, 
raisins, and oregano. Season with salt and pepper. 
Add the dressing; toss to combine. Chill, covered, 
until ready to serve. 
sour cream dressing 

MAKES ABOUT 1 CUP 

1/2 cup mayonnaise 

2 tablespoons sour cream 
1/4 cup cider vinegar 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

In a small bowl, whisk together the mayonnaise, 
sour cream, and vinegar; season with salt and 
pepper. Refrigerate, covered, until ready to use, 
up to 4 days. 

salmon and golden beet salad 
with crisp bacon 

SERVES 4 

8 small golden beets (about 10 ounces) 

3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
1/4 teaspoon coarse salt 


4 slices turkey bacon (about 21/4 ounces), 
sliced crosswise into thin strips 


1/2 lemon, sliced into 4 rounds 

4 salmon fillets (6 ounces each) 
1 shallot, finely chopped 


11/2 tablespoons white-wine vinegar 
1 pound baby spinach 

Freshly ground pepper 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees  F. On a piece of aluminum 
foil, toss the beets with 1 tablespoon oil and 
the salt; wrap the beets in foil to make a packet. 
Cook until the beets are easily pierced with a fork, 
about 35 minutes. Let cool; peel the beets, and slice 
them into  -thick rounds. 
2. Cook the bacon on another baking sheet until 
crisp, about 10 minutes. Transfer to a paper-
towel-lined plate; let drain. 
3. Place the lemon slices and 6 cups water in a large 
saucepan; bring to a boil. Reduce heat; add the 
salmon, and cook at a bare simmer until flaky, about 
12 minutes. Transfer the fish to a plate; let cool. 
4. Make the dressing: In a small bowl, whisk together 
the shallot, vinegar, and remaining 2 tablespoons 
oil until emulsified. 
5. Place the spinach and beets in a bowl. Add the 
dressing and some bacon; season with pepper. Toss 
to combine. Divide among plates; top each with a 
salmon fillet. Garnish with the remaining bacon. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 465 CALORIES, 26 G 

FAT, 122 MG CHOLESTEROL, 12 G CARBOHYDRATE, 537 MG 

SODIUM, 46 G PROTEIN, 5 G FIBER 

184 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


chicken and shredded 
cabbage salad with noodles 
and peanut sauce 

SERVES 12 

The broth left over from poaching chicken 
breasts makes a delicious soup base. Refrigerate 
it in an airtight container up to 3 days or freeze 
up to 2 weeks; bring to a boil before using. 

3 quarts water 

2 stalks celery, cut in half lengthwise 
1   piece fresh ginger, thinly sliced 


2 garlic cloves 

8 sprigs cilantro, including stems, roughly 
chopped (about 3/4 cup), plus 1/2 cup 
loosely packed leaves for garnish 


2 tablespoons toasted sesame oil 

Coarse salt 
3 boneless, skinless chicken breasts 
(about 3 pounds) 
1 pound somen or vermicelli noodles 


1/2 head green cabbage 
1 bunch carrots, peeled (about 6 carrots) 


2 serrano or jalapeno peppers, seeds and 
ribs removed 


1/2 cup loosely packed fresh mint leaves, 
chopped 


1 cup Peanut Sauce (recipe follows) 
1/2 cup roasted unsalted peanuts 


1. In a large saucepan, combine the water with the 
celery, ginger, garlic, chopped cilantro, 1 tablespoon 
sesame oil, and a pinch of salt; bring to a boil over 
high heat. Add the chicken breasts, and reduce heat 
to medium. Simmer until the chicken is cooked 
through, about 12 minutes. Remove from heat, and 
let stand until the chicken is cool enough to handle, 
about 10 minutes. Transfer the chicken to a cutting 
board, and cut it into   strips, or shred as 
finely as possible with your fingers. Place in a 
medium bowl, and set aside. 
2. Bring a large pot of water to a boil; add salt. Cook 
the noodles until they are al dente, according to 
package instructions, about 3 minutes. Transfer to 
a colander, let drain, and rinse under cold water until 
they are cool. Place in a medium bowl, and toss with 
the remaining tablespoon sesame oil; set aside. 

3. Cut the cabbage in half, and remove the core. 
Slice the cabbage and carrots as thinly as possible 
with a mandoline or sharp knife. Place in a large 
bowl. Cut the serrano chiles into very thin strips, 
and add to the bowl along with the shredded 
chicken and mint. Just before serving, pour the 
peanut sauce over the mixture, and toss to coat. 
Place the noodles on a large serving platter, and 
pile the chicken mixture on top. Sprinkle with 
peanuts and cilantro leaves. 
peanut sauce 

MAKES 21/2 CUPS 

This recipe makes more than you will need for 
the salad; serve extra sauce on the side so guests 
can help themselves. Unused sauce can be stored, 
covered, in the refrigerator up to 4 days. 

1   piece fresh ginger, minced or 
grated (about 3 tablespoons) 


2 shallots, minced (about 1/3 cup) 

1/4 cup Asian fish sauce 

1/2 cup low-sodium soy sauce 

3/4 cup fresh lime juice 
1 cup smooth peanut butter 
1/4 cup toasted sesame oil 


In a large bowl, combine the ginger, shallots, fish 
sauce, soy sauce, and lime juice. Whisk in the 
peanut butter; whisk in the sesame oil. 

SALADS 185 


cucumber, corn, and crab salad 

SERVES 4 TO 6 

We serve this salad on whole-grain toast as an 
open-face sandwich, but it is also delicious 
mounded on a bed of crisp salad greens. 

11/2 cucumbers

Coarse salt 

1 pound jumbo lump crabmeat, picked 
over and rinsed 


2 ears corn, kernels cut from cobs 

1/2 small red onion, finely diced 

1 avocado

Cucumber Vinaigrette (recipe follows) 

Freshly ground pepper 

1. Sprinkle the cucumber lightly with salt, and place 
in a fine sieve set over a medium bowl. Cover with 
plastic wrap, and place in the refrigerator 30 minutes. 
Rinse and drain well; discard the liquid. 
2. Combine the crabmeat, corn, onion, avocado, cucumber, 
and 1/2 cup cucumber vinaigrette in a large 
bowl, and stir to combine. Season with salt and pepper. 
Store in an airtight container in the refrigerator 
until ready to serve. 
cucumber vinaigrette 

MAKES ABOUT 1 CUP 

1/2 cucumber, peeled and seeded 

2 tablespoons sherry vinegar 

2 tablespoons Dijon mustard 

1 tablespoon chopped fresh tarragon 

1/2 cup grapeseed oil 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

Place the cucumber, vinegar, mustard, and tarragon 
in a food processor, and process until smooth. With 
the machine running, drizzle in the grapeseed oil; 
process until emulsified. Season with salt and pepper. 
Refrigerate, covered, up to 2 days. 

arugula salad with 
french lentils, smoked chicken, 
and roasted peppers 


SERVES 6 

The lentils can be made up to a day in advance 
and the salad assembled at the last minute. 
Poached or grilled chicken breast would produce 
equally appetizing results. 

1/2 pound French green lentils, picked over 
and rinsed 


1 141/2-ounce can low-sodium chicken broth, 
or homemade, skimmed of fat 

1 cup water 
4 sprigs thyme, plus 1/2 tablespoon 
fresh thyme leaves 
2 red bell peppers 


21/2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
1 tablespoon red-wine vinegar 

1 tablespoon balsamic vinegar 

1/2 teaspoon coarse salt, plus more for 
seasoning 


6 ounces baby arugula (about 6 cups) 

6 ounces smoked skinless, boneless chicken 
breast, cut into matchsticks 


Freshly ground pepper 

1. In a medium saucepan, combine the lentils, broth, 
water, and thyme sprigs. Bring to a boil, reduce heat 
to medium-low, and simmer, uncovered, until the 
lentils are tender, about 20 minutes. Drain and set 
aside in a bowl to cool. 
2. While the lentils are cooking, roast the red peppers 
over a gas flame or under the broiler, turning 
occasionally, until blackened. Place in a heatproof 
bowl, cover with plastic wrap, and let stand until 
cool. Peel and seed the peppers, and cut into   
slices. Place the strips in a small saucepan with 
1 1/2 tablespoon oil; cover, and cook gently over low 
heat, stirring occasionally, until meltingly tender, 
about 10 minutes. Set aside, and let cool. 
3. In a large bowl, whisk together the vinegars, salt, 
thyme leaves, and remaining 2 tablespoons oil until 
blended. Add half of the dressing to the lentils, and 
toss to coat. Add the arugula, chicken, and cooled 
pepper strips to the remaining dressing, and toss. 
186 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


Season both salads with salt and pepper. Arrange 
the lentils into mounds on each of 6 salad plates, 
form a well in the center of each, and fill with the 
arugula mixture. 

FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 250 CALORIES, 9 G FAT, 

15 MG CHOLESTEROL, 26 G CARBOHYDRATE, 560 MG 

SODIUM, 17 G PROTEIN, 3 G FIBER 

taco salad 

SERVES 6 

To reduce the fat, we eliminated the cheese and 
toasted the corn tortillas in the oven rather than 
frying them in oil. 

2 ears corn, husks and silk removed 

3 corn tortillas, cut into 16 wedges each 

3/4 cup nonfat plain yogurt 
2 limes 
1/3 cup fresh cilantro leaves 


11/2 tablespoons finely chopped and seeded 
jalapeno pepper 

1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 
1 pound ground turkey 


1 teaspoon chili powder 
1 teaspoon ground cumin 


1/2 pound iceberg lettuce, torn into   
pieces (about 3 cups) 


1 cup canned black beans, drained 
and rinsed 


2 plum tomatoes, cut into  -thick 
wedges (about 1 cup) 


1/2 red onion, peeled and cut into  thick 
wedges (about 1 cup) 


1 small mango, peeled, seeded, and cut into 
 -thick wedges (11/2 cups) 

1. Bring a large saucepan of water to a boil over high 
heat. Add the corn, and reduce heat to medium; simmer 
until the kernels are tender, 5 to 10 minutes. 
Transfer the corn to a plate; let cool. Slice the kernels 
off the cobs; place in a small bowl, and set aside 
(you should have about 11/4 cups). 
2. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees  F. Spread the tortilla 
wedges in a single layer on a rimmed baking sheet; 
bake until crisp, turning once, about 10 minutes. Remove 
from the oven; let cool, and set aside. 
3. Make the dressing: In a medium bowl, whisk together 
the yogurt, juice from 1 lime, cilantro, 
jalapeno, and salt. Set aside. 
4. In a medium nonstick skillet, brown the turkey 
over medium heat, stirring frequently, until no 
longer pink, about 7 minutes. Stir in the chili powder, 
cumin, and juice from remaining lime. 
5. Transfer the mixture to a large serving bowl. Add 
the lettuce, beans, tomatoes, onion, mango, and reserved 
corn and tortillas. Toss to combine well. Drizzle 
with yogurt dressing; serve immediately. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 233 CALORIES, 2 G FAT, 

37 MG CHOLESTEROL, 32 G CARBOHYDRATE, 207 MG 

SODIUM, 25 G PROTEIN, 6 G FIBER 

southwestern cobb salad 

SERVES 6 TO 8 AS A MAIN DISH 

1/4 cup freshly squeezed lime juice, plus 
juice of 2 limes 


1/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons extra-virgin 
olive oil 


1/4 cup soy sauce 
1 teaspoon ground cumin 


1 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes 
4 boneless, skinless chicken breast halves 


4 large eggs 
1/2 pound thick-sliced bacon 


1 yellow bell pepper 

1 poblano chile 

1 tomato, seeded and cut in   pieces 
1/2 cup roughly chopped pitted black olives 
(21/2 ounces) 
1 sweet onion, cut into   pieces 


Coarse salt and freshly ground black 

pepper 

2 ripe but firm Hass avocados, peeled and 
cut into   pieces 


1/2 cup chopped fresh cilantro 
1/8 teaspoon cayenne pepper (optional) 


1 15-ounce can black beans, rinsed 
and drained 


1 small head romaine lettuce, torn in   
pieces 


Green Goddess Dressing (recipe follows) 

SALADS 187 


1. Combine the 1/4 cup lime juice, 1/4 cup oil, soy 
sauce, 1/2 teaspoon cumin, and red pepper flakes in 
a small bowl. Place the chicken breasts in a large 
resealable plastic bag. Pour the marinade into the 
bag, and refrigerate at least 1 hour or overnight. 
2. Heat a grill or grill pan over medium-high heat. 
Lift the chicken from the bag, allowing the excess 
marinade to drain off. Cook until grill marks appear 
and the chicken is cooked through, about 5 minutes 
per side. Cool the chicken completely, and cut 
into   pieces; set aside. 
3. Place the eggs in a saucepan with cold water to 
cover. Bring to a boil. Cover; remove from heat. Let 
sit 11 minutes. Drain; rinse under cold running 
water until cooled. Peel and roughly chop the eggs. 
4. Heat a skillet over medium heat. Cook the bacon 
until crisp, and drain on paper towels. Crumble 
when cool; set aside. 
5. Place the yellow and poblano peppers directly on 
the trivet of a gas burner over high heat or on the 
grill or grill pan used for the chicken. Turn the peppers 
with tongs as they char. (Alternatively, place the 
peppers on a baking pan; broil in the oven, turning 
as each side becomes charred.) Transfer to a large 
bowl; cover immediately with plastic wrap. Let the 
peppers sweat until cool enough to handle. Peel off 
the blackened skin and discard. Remove the seeds; 
chop the yellow pepper into   pieces and the 
poblano into   pieces; set aside separately. 
6. In a bowl, combine the yellow pepper, tomato, 
olives, and half the chopped onion. Sprinkle with 
salt and pepper; set aside. In another bowl, combine 
the poblano with the avocados, 1/4 cup cilantro, 
juice of 2 limes, cayenne pepper (if using), and remaining 
1/2 teaspoon cumin; season with salt and 
pepper; set aside. 
7. Combine the black beans with the remaining 1/4 
cup cilantro and chopped onion. Drizzle with the 
remaining 2 tablespoons olive oil, and season with 
salt and pepper; set aside. 
8. Arrange the romaine on a platter. Arrange the 
chicken, eggs, bacon, tomato, avocado, and bean 
mixture in sections across the romaine. Drizzle with 
dressing; serve. 
green goddess dressing 

MAKES 11/2 CUPS 

Let dressing sit overnight to meld flavors. 

1/2 cup mayonnaise 

1/2 cup sour cream 
2 tablespoons buttermilk 


1 tablespoon white-wine vinegar 
1 teaspoon Worcestershire sauce 


1 bunch chives, coarsely chopped (1/2 cup) 
2 green onions, coarsely chopped 


2 tablespoons chopped fresh cilantro 
2 tablespoons chopped fresh flat- 
leaf parsley 
1 teaspoon sugar 


1 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/2 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper 


Pinch of cayenne pepper (optional) 

Combine all the ingredients in a blender or food 
processor; process until smooth. Refrigerate in an 
airtight container up to 3 days. 

fennel crab salad 
on beefsteak tomatoes 


SERVES 6 TO 8 

11/2 pounds beefsteak tomatoes (about 2), 
preferably orange or yellow 

10 ounces baby fennel bulbs (about 3 or 4) 
1 tablespoon freshly squeezed lemon juice 


1/2 pound jumbo lump crabmeat 
5 ounces purslane or watercress 


2 tablespoons olive oil 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


Cut the tomatoes into   slices; set aside. Remove 
the outer peel from the fennel if necessary. 
Using a mandoline, thinly shave the fennel, and toss 
with the lemon juice; set aside. Remove any shells 
from the crabmeat, and set aside. Arrange the 
purslane on a serving dish, and top with the tomatoes, 
shaved fennel, and crabmeat. Lightly drizzle 
each tomato with olive oil, and sprinkle with salt 
and pepper; serve immediately. 

188 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


lobster salad with grapefruit, 
avocado, and hearts of palm 

SERVES 8 AS AN APPETIZER 

4 11/4-pound lobsters 

2 ruby red or pink grapefruits 

1 tablespoon finely minced shallots 

11/4 teaspoons Dijon mustard 
2 tablespoons white-wine vinegar 

1 tablespoon freshly chopped lemon basil 
or regular basil, plus leaves for garnish 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil 

2 avocados, peeled and pitted 

4 hearts of palm, cut into  -thick 
rounds 


1 large head Boston lettuce (8 ounces) 

1. Fill a large bowl with ice and water; set aside. 
Bring a stockpot of water to a boil. Boil the lobsters 
for 10 minutes; transfer to the ice bath until cool. 
Break off the claws and tails; use the bodies to make 
a stock, or discard. Split the tail lengthwise with a 
sharp knife; remove the meat. Slice the tail into bite-
size pieces. Remove the claws from the shells, keeping 
them whole if possible. Chill the lobster meat. 
2. Cut the ends off the grapefruit; remove the peel, 
pith, and outer membranes. Lift the sections away 
from the membranes, and reserve. Squeeze 1/2 cup 
juice from the membranes into a bowl for dressing. 
3. Place the shallots, mustard, vinegar, grapefruit 
juice, and lemon basil in a bowl; season with salt 
and pepper. Whisk to combine. Gradually whisk in 
the olive oil; adjust seasoning. 
4. Cut the avocados into  -thick wedges; coat 
with a little grapefruit juice to prevent discoloration. 
Add the lobster, grapefruit, and hearts of palm. Line 
8 dishes with 1 lettuce leaf each. Tear the remaining 
lettuce into bite-size pieces; add to the lobster 
mixture. Drizzle with dressing; toss. Fill the lettuce 
leaves with salad; garnish with lemon basil. 
chopped lemongrass 
chicken salad 


SERVES 8 

4 whole boneless, skinless chicken breasts 
(4 pounds) 


Lemongrass Marinade (recipe follows) 

2 teaspoons coarse salt, plus more for 
seasoning and cooking water 


1/2 teaspoon freshly ground pepper, plus 
more for seasoning 


1 pound sugar snap peas, strings removed 
2 shallots, roughly chopped 


1  -piece peeled fresh ginger, 
roughly chopped 


1/2 cup freshly squeezed lime juice 

3/4 cup fresh mint leaves 
3/4 cup fresh cilantro leaves 
6 tablespoons canola oil 

1 head romaine lettuce, chopped into 
pieces 


2 mangoes, peeled, pitted, and cut into 


3 red bell peppers, cored, seeded, and 
cut into  -long matchsticks 


1 fennel bulb, trimmed, cored, and cut 
into   dice 


6 scallions, white and pale-green parts 
only, thinly sliced 


1. Place the chicken between sheets of plastic wrap; 
pound to   thickness. Place in a plastic or 
glass dish; coat with marinade. Cover; chill 4 hours 
or overnight. 
2. Heat the grill or broiler. Season the chicken with 
salt and pepper; grill until golden brown and cooked 
through, 4 to 5 minutes per side. Set aside to cool. 
3. Fill a large bowl with ice and water; set aside. 
Bring a large saucepot of water to a boil; add salt. 
Add the snap peas; cook until bright green and still 
crisp, about 2 minutes. Transfer to the ice bath to 
cool. Drain; cut into   pieces. 
4. Place the shallots and ginger in a food processor; 
process until very finely chopped. Add the lime 
juice, 1/2 cup mint, 1/2 cup cilantro, the salt, and pepper; 
process until herbs are finely chopped. Slowly 
add oil through feed tube with motor running. 
SALADS 189 


5. Layer the romaine, mangoes, chicken, red pepper, 
fennel, snap peas, and scallions in a large bowl. 
Top with the remaining mint and cilantro. Serve with 
dressing on the side, or add dressing to the bowl. 
lemongrass marinade 

MAKES 12/3 CUPS 

This marinade may be made in advance and kept 
in the refrigerator for 2 days. 

4 stalks lemongrass, tough outer leaves 
removed, cut into pieces 


1   piece peeled fresh ginger, roughly 
chopped 


4 garlic cloves 

2 shallots, peeled and roughly chopped 
2 tablespoons brown sugar 


1/2 cup mirin 
2 tablespoons Asian fish sauce 


6 tablespoons canola oil 

Add the lemongrass, ginger, garlic, and shallots 
through the feed tube of a food processor with 
motor running. Process until very finely chopped. 
Add the sugar, mirin, and fish sauce; process until 
pureed, scraping the sides as needed. With the 
motor running, slowly add the oil; process until incorporated. 


warm butter-poached 
lobster salad with tarragon-
citrus dressing 

SERVES 2 

Coarse salt 
2 tablespoons distilled white vinegar 


1 live lobster (about 11/4 pounds) 

1 tangelo, tangerine, or orange (7 ounces), 
plus 1 cup juice, strained 


1/2 cup (1 stick) cold unsalted butter, cut into 
small pieces 


1 sprig fresh tarragon, plus 10 leaves 
1/4 teaspoon freshly ground white pepper 


4 leaves Bibb lettuce 

1. Bring a large pot of water to a boil; add 2 tablespoons 
salt and the vinegar. Plunge lobster head 
first into water; cook 3 minutes (meat will not be 
fully cooked). Transfer lobster to a cutting board. 
2. Using a kitchen towel to protect your hands, twist 
off tail and claws; discard body. Twist fan off end of 
tail, and push meat out of shell. Alternatively, use 
kitchen shears to cut up length of tail, and pull shell 
away from meat. Cut tail meat in half lengthwise, 
and transfer to a plate lined with paper towels; set 
aside. Separate claws from knuckles; twist and pull 
off pincers, being careful to keep meat intact. With 
back of knife, crack knuckle end of claw to loosen 
shell. Gently remove whole piece of meat; set aside 
with tail. Using your finger or the handle of a spoon, 
push knuckle meat out of shell. Wipe any white 
residue off meat. Meat can be refrigerated in an airtight 
container up to 2 hours ahead; bring to room 
temperature before poaching. 
3. Remove peel and pith from tangelo using a sharp 
knife. Working over a bowl, carve out flesh between 
membranes, allowing segments to drop into bowl. 
Squeeze juice from membranes into bowl. Transfer 
juice in bowl to a separate bowl; reserve juice for 
dressing. 
4. Put 1/3 cup juice into a small saucepan; bring to 
a boil. Reduce heat to low, and whisk in butter, 
1 piece at a time, until smooth. Add a pinch of salt 
and the tarragon sprig. Submerge lobster meat in 
the butter sauce. Poach until opaque and cooked 
through, 21/2 to 3 minutes. 
5. Whisk 3 tablespoons warm poaching liquid into 
2 tablespoons reserved juice in bowl; whisk in pepper 
and 1/2 teaspoon salt. Add lobster to dressing; 
toss gently to coat. Just before serving, add tangelo 
segments and tarragon leaves; toss gently to combine. 
Season with salt. 
6. Arrange 2 lettuce leaves on each serving plate. 
Place lobster and tangelo segments on top. Spoon 
dressing over top. 
190 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


basque salad 

SERVES 4 TO 6 

for the salad 

1 pound small Yukon Gold potatoes 

1 cup dry sherry 
1/2 teaspoon saffron threads 


1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil 

1 fillet wild striped bass (1 pound), skin on 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

3 ounces dried chorizo sausage, cut into 
 -thick slices 


4 shallots, thinly sliced into rings 

6 littleneck clams, scrubbed well 

12 mussels (about 8 ounces), scrubbed well 
and debearded 


2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 

2 pounds medium tomatoes, cut into 
 -thick slices 


for the dressing 

1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice 

2 tablespoons finely chopped fresh flat-leaf 
parsley 

2 tablespoons finely chopped fresh basil 

2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

for serving 

Saffron Aioli (recipe follows) 

1 baguette, torn into large pieces and 
lightly toasted 


1. Cover the potatoes with cold water in a medium 
saucepan. Bring to a boil. Reduce to a simmer. Cook 
until potatoes are tender when pierced with a sharp 
knife, about 15 minutes. Drain; let cool completely. 
2. Preheat the oven to 475 degrees F. Heat sherry in a small 
saucepan over medium-low heat until warm, 2 to 5 
minutes. Add saffron, and stir until it has dissolved. 
Set aside. 
3. Heat oil in a cast-iron skillet in oven 5 minutes. 
Season fish with salt and pepper; set aside. Remove 
skillet from oven, and add fish, skin side down. Drizzle 
with the sherry mixture. Add sausage and shallots. 
Roast 10 minutes. Remove from oven; brush 
fish with pan juices. Add clams and mussels. Roast 
until fish is cooked through and clams and mussels 
have opened, about 10 minutes (discard any shellfish 
that remain closed). Transfer skillet to a wire 
rack. Drizzle with lemon juice. Let cool 15 minutes. 

4. Arrange tomato slices on a platter. Cut cooled 
potatoes into  -thick rounds; arrange over 
tomatoes. Top with seafood mixture; reserve 2 tablespoons 
pan juices. 
5. Make the dressing: Whisk reserved pan juices, 
lemon juice, parsley, and basil in a medium bowl. 
Gradually add oil, whisking until emulsified. 
6. Drizzle salad with dressing. Serve with saffron 
aioli and toasted baguette. 
saffron aioli 

MAKES ABOUT 1 CUP 

2 large egg yolks 
1 garlic clove 
1/2 teaspoon saffron threads 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


3/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons extra-virgin 
olive oil 
21/2 teaspoons fresh lemon juice 

Put egg yolks, garlic, and saffron into a food processor; 
season with salt and pepper. Process until 
smooth. With processor running, gradually add oil, 
drop by drop at first, then in a slow, steady stream, 
until a thick mayonnaise forms. Mix in lemon juice. 
Transfer to a small dish. Serve at room temperature; 
do not leave unrefrigerated longer than 1 hour. Aioli 
can be refrigerated, covered, up to 2 days. 

NOTE The egg yolks in this recipe are not fully cooked. 
It should not be prepared for pregnant women, babies, 
young children, the elderly, or anyone whose 
health is compromised. 

SALADS 191 


french country salad 

SERVES 4 

for the dressing 

1 tablespoon champagne vinegar 

1 tablespoon grainy Dijon mustard 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
3 to 4 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 


1/2 cup walnut halves, toasted and finely 
chopped 


for the salad 

8 cipollini onions (about 4 ounces), peeled 
and halved if desired 


1/2 cup balsamic vinegar 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


2 tablespoons unsalted butter 

1 medium apple (preferably Golden 
Delicious), cored and cut into  thick 
slices 


8 slices French cooked ham or boiled ham 
1 head Bibb or Boston lettuce, leaves 
separated 
3 ounces Gruyere cheese, thinly sliced 


8 slices rustic bread, for serving 

1. Make the dressing: Whisk champagne vinegar, 
mustard, and 1/2 teaspoon salt in a medium bowl. 
Gradually add oil, whisking until emulsified. Stir in 
walnuts. Season with pepper. Set aside. 
2. Stir onions, balsamic vinegar, and 1/2 teaspoon 
salt in a skillet; season with pepper. Bring to a boil. 
Reduce to a simmer. Cook, stirring occasionally, 
until onions have absorbed most of the liquid, 8 to 
10 minutes. Drain. Let onions cool. 
3. Melt butter in a medium skillet over medium-
high heat. Add apple; cook, flipping once, until just 
beginning to brown and soften, 1 to 3 minutes per 
side. Remove from heat; set aside. 
4. To serve, arrange 2 slices of ham on each of 4 
plates. Toss lettuce with dressing; divide among 
plates. Arrange cheese and apple slices on top, 
evenly dividing among plates. Garnish each plate 
with 2 onions. Serve with bread. 
white bean salad with spicy 
roasted tomatoes and broccoli 

SERVES 4 

The ingredients can be prepared the day before 
and refrigerated. 

2 bunches broccoli, trimmed, florets and 
stems cut into   pieces (4 cups) 


3 large garlic cloves, thinly sliced 

5 teaspoons extra-virgin olive oil 

1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 

1 pound large cherry tomatoes, halved 
(about 3 cups) 


1 tablespoon coarsely chopped fresh 
oregano 


1/4 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes 

11/2 teaspoons Dijon mustard 
1 tablespoon red-wine vinegar 

1 teaspoon fresh lemon juice 
Freshly ground pepper 


2 cups drained jarred or canned large white 
beans, such as large lima beans or 
gigande beans 

2 ounces baby spinach (about 2 cups) 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Toss together broccoli, 
half the garlic, 2 teaspoons oil, and 1/4 teaspoon 
salt, and arrange on a rimmed baking sheet. Roast 
until broccoli is just tender, 15 to 20 minutes. Transfer 
to a plate; let cool completely. 
2. Toss together tomatoes, remaining garlic, the 
oregano, red pepper flakes, remaining 1/4 teaspoon 
salt, and 1 teaspoon oil. Arrange on baking sheet. 
Roast until tomatoes have softened and skins begin 
to wrinkle, 15 to 20 minutes. Transfer to a plate; let 
cool completely. 
3. Whisk mustard, vinegar, and lemon juice in a 
small bowl. Whisk in remaining 2 teaspoons oil; 
season with pepper. 
4. Just before serving, toss together beans, broccoli, 
tomatoes, spinach, and dressing. The salad can 
be refrigerated in an airtight container up to 8 hours. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 253 CALORIES, 1 G SAT


URATED FAT, 5 G UNSATURATED FAT, 0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 

38 G CARBOHYDRATE, 700 MG SODIUM, 14 G PROTEIN, 

14 G FIBER 

192 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


sandwiches 


AND 

savory pies 



asian salad wraps 

MAKES 18 

To julienne the vegetables, cut them into thin 
matchstick-size pieces using a sharp knife or a 
mandoline. Refrigerate them in an airtight container 
until ready to use, up to 3 hours. 

1/4 cup plus 3 tablespoons hoisin sauce 

1/4 cup fresh lime juice 
3 tablespoons soy sauce 


3 tablespoons toasted sesame seeds 
2 tablespoons mild Asian chile oil 


1 tablespoon Asian fish sauce 
1 tablespoon packed light-brown sugar 


4 ounces thin, dried rice stick noodles 

2 tablespoons fresh cilantro leaves, 
coarsely chopped 


18 round rice-paper wrappers (6 inches in 
diameter) 


1 head green-leaf lettuce, leaves separated, 
inner stalks of leaves cut out 

1/2 small red bell pepper, julienned 
1/2 small yellow bell pepper, julienned 


1 small jicama (about 12 ounces), peeled 
and julienned 


2 medium carrots, peeled and julienned 

1 package (31/2 ounces) enoki mushrooms 

31/2 ounces pea shoots (about 2 cups), 
trimmed 

18 fresh chives 

1. Whisk together the hoisin sauce, lime juice, soy 
sauce, toasted sesame seeds, Asian chile oil, fish 
sauce, and brown sugar in a medium bowl. 
2. Cook the noodles according to package instructions; 
drain. Combine the noodles, hoisin mixture, 
and cilantro in a large bowl; toss. Let stand at room 
temperature, tossing occasionally, 15 minutes. 
3. Soak 1 rice-paper wrapper in a bowl of hot water 
until softened, 30 seconds to 11/2 minutes. Lay the 
wrapper flat on a paper towel or a piece of parchment 
paper. Cover with another paper towel or 
piece of parchment paper. Repeat with 2 more wrappers. 
Lay the wrappers flat on a clean work surface. 
4. Place 1 lettuce leaf (or part of a leaf) on top of 1 
wrapper so the top edge of the leaf extends over the 
top edge of the wrapper. Top with a mix of bell peppers, 
jicama, carrots, mushrooms, and pea shoots. 
Place a small amount of the marinated noodles on 
top of the vegetables. 
5. Fold the bottom two-thirds of the wrapper up over 
the filling. Fold 1 side over the filling and roll up 
tightly, being careful not to tear the wrapper. Gently 
tie a chive around the middle of the wrap to hold 
it together. Transfer to a large platter; cover with a 
damp paper towel. Repeat with the remaining wrappers 
and filling, working 3 at a time. 
6. Refrigerate in an airtight container (or store in a 
chilled cooler) up to 2 hours until ready to serve. 
herbed egg salad in pitas 

SERVES 4 

12 hard-cooked eggs, peeled, cut into   
dice 


1/2 cup mayonnaise 

2 teaspoons finely chopped fresh dill 
2 teaspoons finely chopped fresh 
tarragon leaves 
1 teaspoon finely chopped fresh chives 


2 scallions, white parts only, finely chopped 
Zest of 1 lemon 

2 teaspoons drained capers, rinsed 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


4 pita breads 

1. Gently stir together the eggs, mayonnaise, dill, 
tarragon, chives, scallions, lemon zest, and capers 
in a medium bowl using a rubber spatula. Season 
with salt and pepper. 
2. Cut 1 inch from the top of each pita to open the 
pocket. Fill each with egg salad, dividing evenly. 
Refrigerate in an airtight container until ready to 
serve, up to 4 hours. 
194 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


shrimp and chive rolls 

MAKES 12 

2 pounds (about 60) small shrimp, peeled 
and deveined 


4 ounces rice vermicelli 
1/4 cup fresh lime juice (2 limes) 


2 tablespoons sesame oil 
1/4 teaspoon coarse salt 


12 8  rice-paper wrappers 
1/2 seedless cucumber, cut into matchsticks 


1/2 pound (about 2 cups) bean sprouts 
1 bunch fresh chives, ends trimmed 


1 head Boston lettuce, washed 
1 bunch fresh mint 


1 bunch fresh cilantro 

1. Bring a large pot of water to a boil. Reduce to a 
simmer. Add the cleaned shrimp; poach until pink 
and cooked through, about 2 minutes. Slice 12 
cooked shrimp in half lengthwise. Set aside. 
2. Bring a medium pot of water to a boil. Cook the 
vermicelli until softened, about 2 minutes. Remove 
from heat; drain. Transfer to a bowl. Add the lime 
juice, sesame oil, and salt; toss. Set aside. 
3. Dip a rice-paper wrapper into a bowl of warm 
water for 5 seconds; transfer to a clean work surface 
(the wrapper will still feel hard but will soften as it 
sits). Lay 1/4 cup vermicelli on the bottom third of 
the rice paper; top with about 4 uncut shrimp and 
some cucumber and bean sprouts. Roll halfway, 
tucking in the ends. Place the chives and 2 shrimp 
halves on the roll; continue to roll so the chives and 
shrimp are enclosed but still showing through the 
rice paper. 
4. Place the finished roll on a plate; cover with a 
damp paper towel. Continue filling and rolling rice 
papers until all ingredients are used. Serve with lettuce, 
mint, and cilantro on the side. 
fried egg-topped sandwiches 

MAKES 4 

8 slices good-quality white bread 

4 ounces fontina, Gruyere, or mozzarella 
cheese, thinly sliced 


2 tablespoons fresh oregano, roughly 
chopped, plus more for garnish 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
2 tablespoons milk 


6 large eggs 
4 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 


1. Cut the bread into 8 rounds with a 3  cookie 
cutter. Top half with a few slices of cheese; sprinkle 
with oregano, salt, and pepper. Top with the remaining 
bread rounds; press gently to adhere. 
2. In a small bowl, whisk together the milk and 2 
eggs. Heat 2 tablespoons oil in a large nonstick skillet 
over medium heat. Dip the sandwiches, one at a 
time, into the egg mixture, letting the excess drip 
back into the bowl; transfer to the skillet. Cook until 
golden and the cheese has melted, about 2 minutes 
per side. Transfer to serving plates. 
3. Wipe the skillet with a paper towel. Heat the remaining 
2 tablespoons oil. Crack the remaining 4 
eggs into the skillet, one at a time. Fry until the 
whites are just set, about 2 minutes. Carefully place 
an egg on each sandwich. Season with salt and pepper; 
garnish with oregano, and serve. 
SANDWICHES AND SAVORY PIES 195 


croque monsieur 

MAKES 4 

2 tablespoons unsalted butter, plus more for 
spreading, room temperature 

2 tablespoons all-purpose flour 

1 cup milk 

1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 
Pinch of freshly ground nutmeg 


Pinch of cayenne pepper 

Pinch of freshly ground black pepper 

8 slices rustic French or firm white 
sandwich bread 


1/4 cup Dijon or whole-grain mustard 

1/2 pound cooked ham, thinly sliced 

1/3 pound Gruyere cheese, thinly sliced, plus 
1 cup freshly grated (about 2 ounces) 


1. Melt the butter in a small saucepan over medium 
heat until just starting to bubble. Add the flour, and 
cook, whisking constantly, until smooth but not 
browned, about 3 minutes. 
2. Whisking constantly, slowly add the milk; continue 
cooking while whisking until mixture has 
thickened, about 3 minutes more. Remove from 
heat, and add salt, nutmeg, cayenne, and black pepper. 
Transfer to a bowl; place plastic wrap directly 
on surface of sauce, and set aside. 
3. Heat the broiler. Heat a griddle or large cast-iron 
skillet over medium-low heat. Smear one side of 
bread slices with mustard. Top 4 slices with a layer 
each of ham and cheese; cover with the remaining 
4 bread slices, pressing gently to adhere. Generously 
butter the outer sides, spreading all the way 
to the edges. 
4. Place the sandwiches on the griddle or in the skillet. 
Cook until the bread is golden brown and cheese 
has melted, 3 to 4 minutes a side. Transfer to a work 
surface; divide bechamel sauce evenly over tops, 
spreading to edges; sprinkle with grated cheese. 
5. Transfer to the broiler, and cook until the cheese 
topping is melted and golden, 2 to 3 minutes. Serve 
immediately. 
fried catfish sandwiches 

MAKES 12 

Vegetable oil, for frying 

4 cups yellow cornmeal 
1 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes 


2 tablespoons coarse salt 
2 teaspoons freshly ground pepper 


1 teaspoon garlic powder 

12 catfish fillets (about 8 ounces each), cut 
in half crosswise 


24 slices white bread 
Mayonnaise, for serving (optional) 


Pickle relish, for serving (optional) 

1 Vidalia or other sweet onion, sliced into 
  rounds 


1. Fill a deep, heavy-bottomed skillet with about 21/2 
inches oil. Place over medium heat until the oil registers 
365 degrees F on a deep-fry thermometer. Meanwhile, 
combine the cornmeal, red pepper flakes, 1 tablespoon 
salt, 1 teaspoon pepper, and garlic powder in 
a shallow bowl or large plate. 
2. Season the catfish fillets on both sides with the 
remaining tablespoon salt and teaspoon pepper. 
Dredge the fillets in the cornmeal mixture, turning 
to coat both sides. Working in batches so as not to 
overcrowd the pan, carefully submerge the fillets 
in the oil, and fry until the crust is crisp and golden 
and the fish is cooked through, about 3 minutes. 
Transfer to a large plate. 
3. To serve, spread the bread slices with mayonnaise 
and relish, as desired. Place the catfish fillets on half 
the slices, and top each with a few onion slices and 
one of the remaining slices of bread. 
196 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


blackened salmon sandwiches 

MAKES 4 

The spice rub can be stored in an airtight plastic 
container for up to 1 month. 

1 teaspoon cumin seed 
1 teaspoon fennel seed 
1 teaspoon dried oregano 
1 teaspoon dried thyme 
2 teaspoons paprika 


1/2 teaspoon ground cayenne pepper 
2 teaspoons coarse salt 
1/2 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper 
2 tablespoons prepared horseradish 


1/4 cup plain low-fat yogurt 
1 tablespoon honey 
4 4-ounce salmon fillets, skin removed 
4 slices crusty bread 
1 bunch arugula, stems trimmed 


1/2 small red onion, thinly sliced crosswise 

1. Place the cumin seed, fennel seed, oregano, and 
thyme in a spice grinder. Pulse until finely chopped 
but not powdery. Transfer to a small bowl; stir in 
the paprika, cayenne pepper, 11/2 teaspoons salt, and 
1/4 teaspoon black pepper; set aside. 
2. In another small bowl, whisk together the horseradish, 
yogurt, honey, remaining 1/2 teaspoon salt, 
and 1/4 teaspoon pepper; set aside. 
3. Heat a heavy skillet over medium-high heat. Coat 
each fillet with 2 teaspoons spice blend; pat with 
your fingers. Place the fillets in the hot skillet. Cook 
until well browned, about 5 minutes. Flip the fillets; 
cook through, about 5 minutes more. Transfer to a 
plate; set aside. 
4. To assemble, spread the bread with the horseradish 
mixture. Top with arugula and onion. Flake 
the salmon into chunks; place on the sandwiches. 
Drizzle with the remaining horseradish mixture; 
serve immediately. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 261 CALORIES, 8 G FAT, 
63 MG CHOLESTEROL, 21 G CARBOHYDRATE, 772 MG 
SODIUM, 26 G PROTEIN, 1 G FIBER 

lobster rolls 

MAKES 8 

Top-split buns are the time-honored choice for 
lobster rolls, but side-split buns can be used instead. 
Some people like only mayonnaise or 
melted butter on their lobster meat, but we love 
the added flavor that fresh herbs provide. 

11/2 pounds cooked, shelled lobster meat 
(about 4 11/2-pound lobsters), chopped 
into   pieces 

2 tablespoons mayonnaise 

1/2 teaspoon finely chopped fresh chives 
(optional) 


1/2 teaspoon finely chopped fresh tarragon 
or chervil (optional) 


1 teaspoon fresh lemon juice (or to taste) 

Coarse or sea salt 
Freshly ground pepper 


8 top-split hot dog buns 

11/2 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted, 
for rolls 

1. Stir together the lobster and mayonnaise. Stir in 
the chives and tarragon (if desired) and the lemon 
juice; season with salt and pepper. Refrigerate, covered, 
while preparing rolls, or up to 2 hours. 
2. Heat a large, heavy skillet or griddle over medium 
heat until hot. Lightly brush the outside of the buns 
with butter; transfer to the skillet. Cook, turning 
once, until buns are golden brown, about 11/2 minutes 
per side. 
3. Spoon about 1/2 cup lobster mixture into each bun. 
Serve immediately. 
SANDWICHES AND SAVORY PIES 197 


lobster clubs 

MAKES 4 

Remade as a club, the lobster roll trades its usual 
bun for brioche and takes on the customary 
bacon, lettuce, and tomato. 

1 pound cooked lobster meat, sliced into 
  pieces 


1/2 cup plus 2 tablespoons mayonnaise, plus 
more for spreading 


3 tablespoons chopped fresh tarragon 
3 tablespoons chopped fresh parsley 


5 teaspoons fresh lemon juice 
Pinch of cayenne pepper 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
8 slices brioche, toasted 


4 leaves Boston lettuce 
8 slices bacon, cooked 


8 slices tomato 

1. In a bowl, toss together the lobster, mayonnaise, 
herbs, lemon juice, and cayenne; season with salt 
and pepper. 
2. Spread additional mayonnaise on the toasted 
brioche; top each of 4 slices with a lettuce leaf, some 
lobster mixture. 2 slices bacon, and 2 slices tomato. 
Top with remaining toast. 
fried green tomato clubs 

MAKES 4 

4 slices bacon 

3/4 cup stone-ground yellow cornmeal 
1 teaspoon salt 
1 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 


Pinch of cayenne pepper 
Pinch of sugar 


2 green tomatoes, thinly sliced 

4 biscuits or English muffins, split and 
toasted 


Mayonnaise, for serving 
Pickled Red Onions (recipe follows) 


4 slices sharp Cheddar cheese 
Hot sauce, for serving (optional) 


1. Cook the bacon in a skillet until crisp; drain on 
paper towels and reserve the drippings in the pan. 
2. In a shallow dish, mix together the cornmeal, salt, 
pepper, cayenne, and sugar. Add the tomatoes, and 
toss to coat. 
3. Heat the reserved drippings over medium heat; 
add the tomatoes, and fry until golden, about 2 minutes 
per side. 
4. Spread the mayonnaise over the cut sides of the 
biscuits; fill each with 1 to 2 slices fried tomatoes, 
1 slice each bacon and cheese, and pickled onions. 
Sprinkle with hot sauce, if desired. 
pickled red onions 

MAKES 2 CUPS 

You'll need to make these onions at least 1 week 
in advance. 

4 red onions, cut into  -thick slices 
11/2 teaspoons coarse salt 
11/2 cups cider vinegar 

3/4 cup sugar 
7 whole black peppercorns 
3 whole allspice 
2 whole cloves 
1 whole cinnamon stick 
1 bay leaf 
1 small dried red chile 
1. Put the onions in a colander set in a large bowl. 
Toss with the salt; refrigerate 1 hour. Rinse the 
onions under cold water; drain. 
2. Bring the vinegar, sugar, spices, bay leaf, and 
chile to a boil in a medium saucepan, stirring constantly. 
Let cool completely. 
3. Add the onions to the vinegar mixture in the pan; 
bring to a boil. Immediately transfer the onions to 
an airtight container using a slotted spoon. Let the 
vinegar mixture cool completely; pour over the 
onions. Refrigerate at least 1 week before serving 
(onions will keep 2 weeks more). 
198 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


lemongrass pork burgers 

MAKES 6 

Thai chiles are small, fresh red or green chiles, 
and are very hot. For a milder flavor, remove the 
seeds. You can substitute 1 fresh serrano chile. 
The flavors of Southeast Asia were the inspiration 
for these lean burgers, which are wrapped, 
Vietnamese-style, in lettuce. 

3 shallots, thinly sliced 

11/2 stalks fresh lemongrass, bottom 6 inches 
only, finely chopped (6 tablespoons) 

1 piece (2 inches) peeled fresh ginger, 
coarsely chopped 


1 pound ground pork 

11/2 teaspoons coarse salt 
1/2 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 

Vegetable oil, for brushing 
1/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons fresh lime juice 
(about 3 limes) 
1/4 cup Asian fish sauce 


3 to 6 fresh Thai chiles (depending on 
desired heat), thinly sliced crosswise 


2 heads Boston lettuce (6 medium cup-
shaped leaves reserved, remaining leaves 
shredded crosswise) 

1/2 cup fresh cilantro leaves 

1/4 cup fresh mint leaves 
Cucumber wedges, for serving (optional) 


1. Process 2 shallots, the lemongrass, and the ginger 
in a food processor until finely ground. Transfer 
the shallot mixture to a medium bowl. Using 
your hands, gently combine the shallot mixture, 
pork, salt, and pepper (do not overwork the meat). 
Shape into 6 patties. Refrigerate, covered, until cold, 
about 1 hour (or overnight). 
2. Preheat the grill to medium-high (if using a charcoal 
grill, coals are ready when you can hold your 
hand 5 inches above grill for just 3 to 4 seconds). 
Brush the grill and the burgers with oil. Grill the 
burgers, flipping once, until cooked through, about 
5 minutes per side. 
3. Make the salad: Stir together the remaining shallot, 
lime juice, fish sauce, and chiles in a small bowl. 
Toss together the shredded lettuce, cilantro, and 
mint in a medium bowl. Add the dressing; toss. 
4. To serve, top each burger with some of the salad, 
then wrap in a Boston lettuce leaf. 
grilled hamburgers 
with goat cheese 


MAKES 6 

3 pounds lean ground chuck 

1 tablespoon each finely chopped fresh 
thyme, oregano, rosemary, and flat-leaf 
parsley 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

3 large tomatoes, thickly sliced 
2 large onions, thickly sliced 


2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

5 ounces fresh goat cheese, sliced into 
6 equal portions 


1 head romaine lettuce, chopped 

1 head red or white endive, thinly sliced 
crosswise 


1. Heat the grill to medium. In a large bowl, place 
the ground chuck and herbs. Season with salt and 
pepper. Using your hands, mix the ingredients together 
until combined. Form into 6 patties; set aside. 
2. Brush the tomato and onion slices with oil, and 
season with salt and pepper. Grill the tomato and 
onion slices until slightly charred on both sides 
(onion should be tender), 4 to 6 minutes for tomatoes 
and 6 to 8 minutes for onions. Remove from 
the grill, and keep warm. 
3. Grill the hamburger patties, 3 to 5 minutes per 
side for medium-rare. When they have reached desired 
doneness, place cheese on top of each patty. 
Grill until the cheese is slightly melted. 
4. To serve, stack slices of onion and tomato on a 
serving platter with romaine and endive. Place the 
hamburgers on top. 
SANDWICHES AND SAVORY PIES 199 


roasted garlic turkey burgers 

MAKES 4 

11/4 pounds ground dark-meat turkey 

11/4 cups coarsely grated aged provolone 
cheese (about 5 ounces) 

1/4 cup Roasted Garlic (recipe follows) 
21/2 teaspoons finely chopped fresh sage 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
Vegetable oil, for brushing 

4 small ciabatta rolls, split 

1 tablespoon olive oil, plus more for 
brushing rolls 


Juice of 1/2 lemon 
1 small bunch watercress, trimmed 


3/4 cup Grilled Tomato Sauce (recipe follows) 
1. Using your hands, gently combine the turkey, 
cheese, roasted garlic, sage, and 1/2 teaspoon each 
salt and pepper in a medium bowl (do not overwork 
the meat). Shape into 4 patties (about 5 inches in 
diameter). Refrigerate, covered, until cold, about 1 
hour (or overnight). 
2. Preheat the grill to medium-high (if using a charcoal 
grill, coals are ready when you can hold your 
hand 5 inches above grill for just 3 to 4 seconds). 
Brush the grill and the burgers with vegetable oil. 
Grill, flipping once, until cooked through, 3 to 4 
minutes per side. Toast the rolls, cut sides down, on 
grill; brush the cut sides with olive oil. 
3. Whisk the lemon juice and 1 tablespoon olive oil 
in a medium bowl; season with salt and pepper. Add 
the watercress; toss. 
4. Spread grilled tomato sauce on the bottom half 
of each roll. Top each with a burger, one-quarter of 
the watercress salad, and the top half of the roll. 
roasted garlic 

MAKES ABOUT 1/2 CUP 

Use half of this recipe in the burgers and half for 
the grilled tomato sauce. 

4 large garlic bulbs, tops cut off to expose 
cloves 


1 tablespoon olive oil 

Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Place the garlic, cut sides 
up, on a large piece of foil. Drizzle with the oil; wrap 
in foil. Bake until softened, about 1 hour and 15 minutes. 
Let cool, then squeeze the pulp from the skins 
into a small bowl. 

grilled tomato sauce 

MAKES ABOUT 11/3 CUPS 

2 tablespoons olive oil, plus more for 
brushing 


2 large beefsteak tomatoes, halved 
crosswise 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1/4 cup Roasted Garlic (recipe above) 

1. Preheat the grill to high (if using a charcoal grill, 
coals are ready when you can hold your hand 5 
inches above grill for just 1 to 2 seconds). Brush the 
grill and the tomatoes with oil. Season the tomatoes 
with salt and pepper. 
2. Grill the tomatoes until softened and slightly 
charred, 3 to 4 minutes per side. Let stand until cool 
enough to handle. Peel the tomatoes; discard skins. 
3. Put the tomatoes, garlic, and oil in a bowl; mash 
with a fork. Season with salt and pepper. The sauce 
can be refrigerated in an airtight container for up 
to 3 days. 
200 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


shrimp and cod burgers 

MAKES 4 

12 ounces medium shrimp, peeled, deveined, 
and cut into chunks 


8 ounces cod, cut into chunks 

3/4 cup fine fresh bread crumbs 
1/4 cup drained capers, rinsed 
2 medium scallions, thinly sliced 


3 tablespoons chopped fresh flat-leaf 
parsley 


1/4 cup fresh lemon juice (1 to 2 lemons) 

11/4 teaspoons coarse salt 

3/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 
Vegetable oil, for brushing 
4 hamburger buns 


Red leaf lettuce, for serving 

Tarragon Tartar Sauce, for serving 
(optional; recipe follows) 
Lemon wedges, for serving 


1. Process half of the shrimp in a food processor 
until a paste forms. Add the cod, remaining shrimp, 
and the bread crumbs, capers, scallions, parsley, 
lemon juice, salt, and pepper. Pulse until just combined 
(do not overprocess). 
2. Using dampened hands, shape into 4 patties. Refrigerate, 
covered, until cold and firm, about 11/2 
hours (or overnight). 
3. Preheat the grill to medium-high (if using a charcoal 
grill, coals are ready when you can hold your 
hand above grill for just 3 to 4 seconds). Brush the 
grill and the burgers with oil. Grill, flipping once, 
until cooked through, about 3 minutes per side. 
Toast the buns on the grill during the last minute 
of cooking, if desired. Serve the burgers on the buns; 
top with lettuce. Serve with tartar sauce, if desired, 
and the lemon wedges. 
tarragon tartar sauce 

MAKES 11/4 CUPS 

1 cup mayonnaise 

3 tablespoons sweet relish 
1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice 


3 tablespoons drained capers, rinsed 
1 tablespoon chopped fresh tarragon 


1 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/8 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 


Stir together the mayonnaise, relish, lemon juice, 
capers, tarragon, salt, and pepper in a medium bowl. 
The sauce can be refrigerated in an airtight container 
up to 1 week. 

grilled mushroom burgers 
with white bean puree 

MAKES 4 

We topped these burgers with smoked Cheddar 
cheese, but you can use another type of cheese, or 
omit it entirely. To clean the mushroom caps, 
wipe them with a damp paper towel; do not rinse 
or soak them because they will remain soggy 
even after cooking. 

2 large garlic cloves, minced 
2 tablespoons chopped fresh thyme 


1 cup cooked or canned cannellini beans, 
drained and rinsed 


2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
Freshly ground pepper 


8 large portobello mushroom caps (about 
1 pound), stems trimmed 


4 teaspoons balsamic vinegar 

2 large red onions (about 1 pound), peeled 
and cut into thin rings 


Olive oil cooking spray, for onions 
4 whole-grain hamburger buns 


2 ounces smoked Cheddar cheese, thinly 
sliced into 4 equal portions 


1/2 small bunch arugula (about 21/2 ounces), 
rinsed well and dried 


SANDWICHES AND SAVORY PIES 201 


1. Heat a grill or grill pan over medium heat. Make 
the bean puree: In a food processor, combine one-
quarter of the garlic (about 1/2 teaspoon), 1 tablespoon 
thyme, the cannellini beans, and 1 teaspoon 
oil; process to form a smooth and spreadable paste. 
If the mixture is too thick, add 1 teaspoon water. 
Season with pepper, and pulse to combine. Set aside. 
2. Combine the remaining garlic, tablespoon 
thyme, and oil on a plate or in a baking pan. Place 
the mushroom caps in the garlic mixture, and turn 
to coat. Season with pepper; drizzle with vinegar. 
3. Place the onion slices on a plate, and lightly coat 
each side with cooking spray. Grill the onions until 
lightly charred on the first side, about 3 minutes. 
Flip the onions, and continue grilling until tender 
and charred on the other side, about 3 minutes 
more. Transfer to a clean plate; keep warm. 
4. Place the mushrooms on the grill, stem side up, 
working in batches if necessary. Grill until browned 
on the first side and juices have begun to collect 
in the centers, about 5 minutes. Flip the mushrooms, 
and continue cooking until the stem side of 
each cap is browned and center is tender, about 4 
minutes more. 
5. Split the hamburger buns in half, and place cut 
side down on the grill; cook until warm and toasted. 
Transfer to a work surface. Spread 1/4 cup bean puree 
on the bottom half of each bun, and top with 2 
grilled mushroom caps. Layer each with sliced 
cheese, grilled onions, and a small handful of arugula. 
Top each with matching roll halves, and serve. 
grilled chicken and 

escarole sandwiches with 

white-bean spread 

MAKES 4 

You can make the white-bean spread ahead of 
time; store it in an airtight container in the refrigerator 
until ready to use, up to three days. The 
chicken will need to marinate for at least two 
hours before being grilled. 

1 teaspoon finely chopped fresh oregano 
1 teaspoon red-wine vinegar 


3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

1 whole boneless, skinless chicken breast 
(about 12 ounces), split and pounded to 1/2 
inch thick 

1 tablespoon minced garlic 

1 cup drained jarred or canned white beans 
(reserve 1/4 cup liquid) 

1 teaspoon finely chopped fresh rosemary 

3/4 teaspoon coarse salt 
Freshly ground pepper 

Vegetable oil cooking spray 

8 slices multigrain bread 
4 small radishes, thinly sliced 


1 cup thinly sliced escarole 

1. Whisk together the oregano, vinegar, and 1 tablespoon 
oil. Brush marinade onto both sides of 
chicken. Transfer chicken to a nonreactive dish; 
cover, and refrigerate at least 2 hours or overnight. 
2. Put remaining 2 tablespoons oil and the garlic 
into a large skillet. Cook over medium heat, stirring 
occasionally, until garlic has softened, about 2 minutes. 
Add beans and reserved liquid, and rosemary. 
Cook, mashing beans with the back of a wooden 
spoon, 5 minutes. Add 1/4 teaspoon salt; season with 
pepper. Transfer to a small bowl. Cover; set aside. 
3. Heat a large grill pan over medium-high heat. 
Coat with cooking spray. Add chicken. Grill, turning 
once, until cooked through, 3 to 4 minutes per 
side. Season with remaining 1/2 teaspoon salt. Transfer 
to a plate; let cool slightly. Cut chicken into 
 -thick slices; set aside. 
4. Toast the bread. Spread each slice with white-
bean spread, dividing evenly. Top 4 slices with the 
chicken, radishes, and escarole, and then the remaining 
bread. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 409 CALORIES, 13 G 

FAT, 49 MG CHOLESTEROL, 43 G CARBOHYDRATE, 541 MG 

SODIUM, 29 G PROTEIN, 6 G FIBER 

202 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


roasted eggplant, zucchini, 
and chickpea wraps 

MAKES 4 

1 tablespoon balsamic vinegar 

11/2 teaspoons fresh lemon juice 
3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

1 tablespoon coarsely chopped fresh thyme 
leaves 

1 tablespoon coarsely chopped fresh 
oregano leaves 


Vegetable oil cooking spray 
1 large eggplant, cut into   cubes 


1 medium zucchini, cut into   cubes 
1 small onion, peeled, root end left intact, 
halved lengthwise, cut into 8 wedges 
1 cup drained canned chickpeas, rinsed 


6 ounces cherry tomatoes (about 11 
tomatoes), halved (quartered if large) 


1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 

Freshly ground pepper 

4 ounces fresh part-skim mozzarella, 
thinly sliced 


4 whole-wheat lavash pieces or whole-wheat 
wraps (2 ounces and 8 inches each) 

1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees  F. Whisk together the 
vinegar, lemon juice, 1 tablespoon oil, and 1 teaspoon 
each thyme and oregano in a small bowl; set 
vinaigrette aside. 
2. Lightly coat a large rimmed baking sheet with 
cooking spray. Toss eggplant, zucchini, onion, and 
remaining 2 teaspoons each thyme and oregano in 
a large bowl. Spread in a single layer on prepared 
baking sheet. Drizzle with remaining 2 tablespoons 
oil. Roast, tossing occasionally, until golden, 30 to 
35 minutes. Let cool slightly. 
3. Transfer vegetable mixture to a large bowl. Add 
chickpeas, tomatoes, and salt; season with pepper. 
Drizzle with vinaigrette; toss to coat. Arrange mozzarella 
in center of lavash pieces or wraps. Top each 
with 11/4 cups vegetable salad. Roll up; cut in half. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 371 CALORIES, 18 G FAT, 

20 MG CHOLESTEROL, 34 G CARBOHYDRATE, 622 MG 

SODIUM, 19 G PROTEIN, 9 G FIBER 

steak sandwiches 

MAKES 4 

1 tablespoon whole black peppercorns 

1 tablespoon whole white peppercorns 
1 tablespoon whole coriander seeds 


1 teaspoon brown mustard seeds 

1 New York strip steak (about 1 pound; 3/4 to 
11/4 inches thick) 

4 garlic cloves 

1/2 cup plus 2 tablespoons plus 1 teaspoon 
extra-virgin olive oil 


1 Vidalia onion, halved and cut into  thick 
slices 

Coarse salt 
4 ciabatta rolls, halved 


1/2 teaspoon fresh lemon juice 
1 ounce baby arugula 


1. Coarsely grind together the spices in a spice 
grinder, then rub steak all over with spice mixture. 
Refrigerate 30 minutes. 
2. Blend garlic and 1/2 cup oil in a blender until combined. 
Set garlic oil aside. 
3. Heat 2 tablespoons olive oil in a medium skillet 
over medium heat. Add onion, and cook, stirring 
occasionally, until caramelized, about 25 minutes. 
4. Bring steak to room temperature. Preheat grill to 
medium (if using a charcoal grill, coals are ready 
when you can hold your hand 5 inches above grill 
for just 5 or 6 seconds). Season steak with salt. Grill, 
flipping once, until medium-rare, about 8 minutes 
per side. Let rest 10 minutes. 
5. Brush cut sides of rolls with garlic oil to taste. 
Grill rolls, cut sides down, until slightly charred 
around edges. 
6. Whisk remaining teaspoon olive oil, the lemon 
juice, and a pinch of salt in a small bowl. Add 
arugula; toss to combine. 
7. Thinly slice steak at an angle. Divide steak, onion, 
and arugula among rolls. 
SANDWICHES AND SAVORY PIES 203 


smoked salmon croque madames 


MAKES 4 

5 tablespoons unsalted butter, softened 

1 tablespoon all-purpose flour 
2/3 cup whole milk 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

8 slices white Pullman bread or thinly 
sliced sandwich bread 


2 tablespoons Dijon mustard 

5 ounces smoked salmon 

1/4 cup small dill sprigs, plus more 
for garnish 


2 cups grated Comte cheese 

4 large eggs 

1. Make the bechamel sauce: Melt 1 tablespoon butter 
in a wide medium saucepan over medium-high 
heat. Whisk in flour; cook, whisking, 30 seconds. 
Gradually whisk in milk; cook, whisking, until mixture 
comes to a boil and has thickened, about 2 minutes. 
Remove from heat. Season with salt and pepper. 
2. Using remaining 4 tablespoons butter, butter 1 
side of each piece of bread. Set aside 4 slices. Spread 
unbuttered sides of remaining 4 slices with mustard; 
top with salmon. Scatter dill over salmon. Top 
each with 1/4 cup cheese. Sandwich with remaining 
bread, buttered side up. 
3. Preheat broiler. Heat a large nonstick skillet over 
medium-low heat. Add sandwiches; cook, turning 
once, until golden brown, about 2 minutes per side. 
Spread 2 tablespoons reserved bechamel sauce on 
top of each sandwich; sprinkle each with 1/4 cup remaining 
cheese. Broil until cheese is bubbling and 
golden brown. 
4. Meanwhile, heat a large nonstick skillet over 
medium heat. Crack eggs into skillet. Cover, and 
cook until whites are set but yolks are still soft, 
about 2 minutes. Season with salt and pepper. Place 
1 egg on top of each sandwich, and serve. 
roast beef sandwiches 

MAKES 6 

To make slicing easier and more precise, make 
the beef a day ahead and refrigerate it overnight. 

2 tablespoons olive oil 

1 tablespoon unsalted butter 
11/2 pounds beef eye of round 
11/2 teaspoons coarse salt 

1/2 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 

3 firm, ripe avocados 

2 medium tomatoes, cut into  -thick 
slices 
Lettuce and radicchio, for serving 


12 slices rustic bread (1/2 inch thick each) 

Horseradish Cream (recipe follows) 

1. Preheat the oven to 425 degrees F. Heat a large ovenproof 
skillet over medium-high heat until warm. Add oil 
and butter; heat until oil is hot and butter has melted. 
2. Season beef with salt and pepper; place in skillet. 
Cook until beef is well browned on all sides, 
about 5 minutes. 
3. Transfer skillet to oven. Bake until an instant-
read thermometer registers 130 degrees F for medium-rare, 
18 to 22 minutes. Transfer beef to a cutting board; 
let rest at least 20 minutes before slicing. 
4. Slice beef very thinly crosswise. Peel and pit avocados; 
cut into  -thick slices. Arrange tomatoes, 
lettuce, radicchio, avocados, and beef over half 
the bread. Spread horseradish cream onto each remaining 
bread slice, and place on top of sandwich, 
spread side down. 
horseradish cream 

MAKES ABOUT 1 CUP 

8 ounces cream cheese, room temperature 

1/4 cup prepared horseradish, or to taste 

1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 

1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 

Stir together all ingredients in a small bowl until 
smooth. Spread can be refrigerated, covered, up to 
1 week. Bring to room temperature before using. 

204 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


oyster po'boys 

MAKES 4 

1/2 cup (1 stick) unsalted butter 
2 tablespoons minced garlic 
4 ciabatta rolls, split 


2/3 cup whole-wheat flour 
1/2 cup powdered milk 
1/2 teaspoon cayenne pepper 


11/2 teaspoons coarse salt 
2 tablespoons finely chopped fresh 
flat-leaf parsley 
2 tablespoons finely chopped fresh chives 
Freshly ground pepper 
32 shucked fresh large oysters, drained 

Vegetable oil, for frying 
2 ounces arugula 
4 anchovy fillets, rinsed 
8 lemon segments 


1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees  F. Melt butter in a 
saucepan with garlic. Puree in a food processor; set 
aside. Remove some of the bread from inside rolls. 
Place rolls on a baking sheet, cut sides up; set aside. 
2. Whisk flour, powdered milk, cayenne, salt, and 
herbs in a bowl; season with pepper. Dredge oysters 
in mixture. Heat 1 inch oil in a large skillet over 
medium-high heat. Meanwhile, spoon 2 teaspoons 
garlic butter over each roll. Bake until golden 
brown, about 5 minutes. 
3. Fry oysters in batches until golden brown, 30 to 
45 seconds per side. Transfer to paper towels. To 
serve, fill the rolls with the oysters, arugula, anchovies, 
and lemon. 
cheddar sandwiches 
with quick pickles and 
honey-mustard spread 


MAKES 4 

Tangy homemade pickles and onions bring intense 
flavor and satisfying heft to these sandwiches. 
However, you can omit step 1 and use 
jarred pickles; just do keep in mind that these 
may increase your sodium intake. 

1 large Vidalia onion, thinly sliced 

1 medium English cucumber, thinly sliced 
1 cup cider vinegar 


1/4 cup honey (preferably raw or 
cream honey) 


2 bay leaves 

11/2 teaspoons finely chopped peeled 
fresh ginger 

11/4 teaspoons brown mustard seeds 
1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 

2 teaspoons grainy mustard 
4 small whole-wheat rolls, halved 


4 ounces sharp white Cheddar cheese, 
thinly sliced 


1. Put onion and cucumber into a heatproof nonreactive 
medium bowl; set aside. Bring vinegar, 2 
tablespoons honey, bay leaves, ginger, mustard 
seeds, salt, and 1/2 cup water to a boil in a medium 
saucepan. Reduce heat, and simmer, stirring occasionally, 
5 minutes. Pour over onion and cucumber. 
Cover loosely, and let cool completely, stirring occasionally 
to submerge vegetables. The pickled 
vegetables can be refrigerated in an airtight container 
up to 2 weeks. 
2. Stir together remaining 2 tablespoons honey and 
the mustard; spread on bottom of rolls. Divide 
cheese among rolls; top each with 1/3 cup drained 
pickled vegetables and top half of roll. The sandwiches 
can be stored, wrapped in parchment, in a 
cool place up to 4 hours. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 343 CALORIES, 

7 G SATURATED FAT, 1 G UNSATURATED FAT, 30 MG CHOLES


TEROL, 46 G CARBOHYDRATE, 664 MG SODIUM, 

11 G PROTEIN, 5 G FIBER 

SANDWICHES AND SAVORY PIES 205 


chicken wraps with 
mango, basil, and mint 

MAKES 4 

The chicken and the mango dressing can be 
made a day ahead and refrigerated separately. 

for the chicken 

1 garlic clove 
1/2 shallot 


1/4 cup loosely packed fresh basil leaves 
1 teaspoon extra-virgin olive oil 


1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/4 teaspoon ground cinnamon 


Freshly ground pepper 

2 boneless, skinless chicken breast halves 
(about 12 ounces total) 


for the dressing 

1/2 shallot 
1/2 mango, peeled and cut into   pieces 


2 teaspoons fresh lime juice 
Pinch of cayenne pepper 


for assembling 

4 lavash breads (31/2 ounces each) 

1/2 mango, peeled and cut into  -thick 
spears 


8 fresh basil leaves 

8 fresh mint leaves 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees  F. Make the chicken: 
Finely chop garlic and shallot in a food processor. 
Add basil and oil, and process until mixture forms 
a coarse paste. Stir in salt and cinnamon, and season 
with pepper. Make a few shallow   slits 
on both sides of chicken; rub all over with the basil 
mixture. Place on a rimmed baking sheet. Bake 
chicken until cooked through, 12 to 15 minutes. 
Let cool completely, then shred chicken into small 
pieces; set aside. 
2. Make the dressing: Finely chop shallot in the 
clean bowl of the food processor. Add mango, and 
process until smooth. Add the lime juice and 
cayenne, and process until combined. 
3. Assemble wraps: Spread about 1/4 cup mango 
dressing in center of each lavash. Top with chicken, 
mango, and herbs. Roll up diagonally to form a 
cone. Wraps can be refrigerated, wrapped in parchment 
and plastic, up to 4 hours. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 350 CALORIES, 

4 G SATURATED FAT, 8 G UNSATURATED FAT, 54 MG 

CHOLESTEROL, 29 G CARBOHYDRATE, 457 MG SODIUM, 

26 G PROTEIN, 1 G FIBER 

ham and cheese tartines 

MAKES 6 

This recipe works equally well with other 
cheeses: Try a mild fontina or Comte in place of 
the Gruyere. 

1/2 pound Gruyere cheese, grated on the 
large holes of a box grater (about 2 cups) 


1/2 pound cream cheese 

2 teaspoons fresh thyme leaves 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


6 slices (1/2 inch thick) sourdough bread, cut 
from an oval loaf 

4 ounces cooked ham, cut into 12 slices 

3 to 4 red radishes, very thinly sliced 

1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. In a food processor, 
pulse half the Gruyere cheese and all the cream 
cheese until smooth, about 30 seconds. Transfer the 
mixture to a small mixing bowl. Fold in the thyme, 
and season with salt and pepper. Set aside. 
2. Place the bread on a baking sheet, and toast in 
the middle of oven, flipping halfway through, until 
golden brown on both sides, about 12 minutes. 
3. Spread the reserved cheese mixture on each slice 
of toast, dividing evenly, and sprinkle with the remaining 
Gruyere. Place 2 slices of ham on each 
toast. Arrange the radishes on top, and serve. 
206 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


nicoise tartines 
with peperonata 

MAKES 6 

Peperonata is an Italian mixture of stewed sweet 
peppers, tomatoes, onions, and garlic. In this 
dish, the peperonata is combined with classic 
Provencal ingredients to make a flavorful topping 
for toast. 

2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

1 large onion, thinly sliced 
3 garlic cloves 


3 red bell peppers, ribs and seeds removed, 
julienned 


Pinch of hot paprika, plus more to taste 

Coarse salt and freshly ground black 
pepper 

6 slices (1/2 inch thick) sourdough bread, 
cut from an oval loaf 


2 large eggs 

1 can (about 6 ounces) tuna packed in oil 
(preferably Italian), drained 


Fleur de sel, or sea salt (optional) 
3 teaspoons capers, drained and rinsed 


1 lemon, for garnish 

1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Heat the oil in a large 
nonstick saute pan. Add the onion and garlic; saute, 
stirring frequently, over medium heat until lightly 
browned, about 8 minutes. Add the bell peppers 
and paprika; continue cooking until the peppers 
are soft and juicy, about 30 minutes. Season with 
salt and black pepper. 
2. Meanwhile, place the bread on a baking sheet; 
toast in the middle of the oven, flipping halfway 
through, until the bread is golden brown on both 
sides, about 12 minutes. 
3. Prepare an ice-water bath; set aside. Place the 
eggs in a medium saucepan; add enough water to 
cover by about 1 inch. Bring to a full boil; cook 1 
minute. Turn off heat; cover, and let stand 12 minutes. 
Transfer the eggs to the ice bath until cool. 
Peel the eggs; slice each about 1/4 inch thick. 
4. Spread the red pepper mixture over slices of 
toast; top with tuna, dividing evenly. Place a few 
slices of egg on top of the tuna. Season with fleur 
de sel or sea salt, if using, and black pepper. Garnish 
with capers, and zest the lemon over the top 
just before serving. 
roasted cherry tomato tartines 

MAKES 6 

1 pint mixed cherry tomatoes 

4 to 6 garlic cloves (unpeeled) 
2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 


2 or 3 sprigs fresh thyme or rosemary 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


6 slices (1/2 inch thick) sourdough bread, 
cut from an oval loaf 


7 ounces (about 3/4 cup) tapenade 

8 ounces mild goat cheese 
1 cup fresh basil leaves, for garnish 


1. Preheat the oven to 450 degrees F. In a medium bowl, toss 
the tomatoes with the garlic, oil, and herbs; season 
with salt and pepper. 
2. Transfer the tomato mixture to a large (10-inch) 
cast-iron skillet, spreading it in an even layer. Roast 
in the oven, stirring occasionally, until the tomatoes 
are soft and slightly blackened, 25 to 30 minutes. 
Remove from heat. Let cool completely. 
3. Reduce the oven heat to 400 degrees F. Toast the bread 
on a baking sheet in the middle of the oven, flipping 
halfway through, until golden brown on both 
sides, about 12 minutes. 
4. Spread 1 to 2 tablespoons tapenade over each 
toast. Divide the goat cheese evenly among the 
toasts; spoon some of the tomatoes and their juices 
on top. Garnish with basil leaves, and serve. 
SANDWICHES AND SAVORY PIES 207 


classic panino 

MAKES 1 

1 ciabatta roll 

2 teaspoons extra-virgin olive oil 
1/4 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 


21/4 ounces sliced fresh buffalo mozzarella 

3/4 ounce shaved Parmesan cheese 
1 ounce thinly sliced prosciutto 
8 fresh basil leaves 


Olive oil, for the pan 

1. Halve the ciabatta roll. Drizzle the cut sides with 
the extra-virgin olive oil; sprinkle with salt and pepper. 
Layer the mozzarella, Parmesan, prosciutto, and 
basil on the bottom half. Top with the other half. 
2. Heat a grill pan over medium heat until almost 
smoking. Lightly brush the pan with olive oil. Grill 
the panino until browned and crisp on the bottom, 
3 to 4 minutes. Flip with a spatula; grill until 
browned on the other side. Serve hot. 
OTHER PANINI IDEAS 

These grilled Italian sandwiches can be 
filled with other ingredients, some traditional, 
others more novel. Before starting, 
lightly brush cut or inner sides of the bread 
with olive oil, and season with salt and pepper. 
Then follow the recipe for the Classic 
Panino. 

1. Fontina cheese, fresh buffalo mozzarella, 
rosemary, and toasted walnuts on a 
baguette. 
2. Sardines, Parmesan cheese, shaved fennel, 
red onion, and lemon juice on rustic bread. 
3. Hot sopressata, Taleggio cheese, and 
paper-thin lemon slices on ciabatta. 
4. Goat cheese, black olives, and radicchio 
on rustic bread. 
5. Bacon, Gorgonzola dolce, and baby 
spinach on a baguette. 
grilled margherita pizzas 

MAKES SIX 9-INCH PIZZAS 

Pizza Dough (recipe follows) 

Extra-virgin olive oil 
Pizza Sauce (recipe follows) 


1 pound fresh mozzarella, thinly sliced 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


Basil leaves, for garnish 

1. Heat a grill until medium-hot. Generously brush 
one side of the pizza dough with oil; grill, oiled side 
down, until the underside is golden brown and the 
top begins to bubble, 3 to 5 minutes. Quickly brush 
the top with oil; flip the crust. Top with thin layers 
of sauce and cheese. Grill until the cheese is just 
melted, the sauce is hot, and the crust is cooked 
through, 3 to 5 minutes more. 
2. Slide the pizza with a large spatula onto a cutting 
board. Season with salt and pepper. Arrange 
basil on top. Repeat to make more pizzas. 
pizza dough 

MAKES ENOUGH FOR SIX 9-INCH PIZZAS 

The dough is easiest to handle when it's well 
chilled-keep it in the refrigerator until right before 
it hits the grill. Depending on the size of 
your grill, you can make more than one pizza at a 
time. (Instead of making six pizzas, another option 
is to make four large ones; cut the dough 
into quarters before rolling it out.) If you don't 
own a grill, you can make the pizzas on a grill pan. 

2 cups warm water (about 110 degrees  F) 
1/2 teaspoon sugar 


2 envelopes active dry yeast (2 scant 
tablespoons) 


3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil, plus 
more for the bowl 


6 to 7 cups all-purpose flour, plus more 
for dusting 


1 tablespoon salt 

208 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


1. Stir the warm water, sugar, and yeast in a small 
bowl until the yeast is dissolved. Let stand until 
foamy, about 5 minutes. Brush a large bowl with oil, 
and set aside. 
2. Stir together 6 cups flour and the salt in a large 
bowl. Pour in the yeast mixture and the oil; stir mixture 
until all of the flour is incorporated. Continue 
to stir until a stiff dough forms. Turn out the dough 
onto a lightly floured surface, and knead with 
floured hands, dusting with as little flour as possible 
if dough seems sticky, just until the ball becomes 
smooth, 2 to 3 minutes. Reshape the dough 
into a ball. (Alternatively, put 6 cups flour, the salt, 
yeast mixture, and oil in the bowl of an electric 
mixer fitted with the paddle attachment. Mix on 
medium speed until the dough is smooth and 
slightly sticky to the touch, 2 to 3 minutes. If the 
dough seems too sticky, add up to 1 cup flour, 2 tablespoons 
at a time, mixing after each addition. 
Knead 4 or 5 turns to form a ball.) 
3. Place the dough in the oiled bowl, smooth side 
up. Tightly cover with plastic wrap, and let rise in 
a warm, draft-free spot until doubled in bulk, about 
40 minutes. 
4. Remove the plastic wrap; punch down the dough. 
Fold the dough back onto itself 4 or 5 times; leave 
the smooth side up. Cover with plastic wrap; let rise 
again until doubled in bulk, 30 to 40 minutes. 
5. Punch down the dough, and transfer it to a clean 
work surface. Cut the dough with a bench scraper 
or knife into sixths. Knead each piece 4 or 5 turns 
to form a ball. Cover all but one with plastic wrap. 
6. On a lightly floured work surface, flatten the 
dough ball into a disk. Loosely cover with plastic 
wrap; let rest 5 minutes. Using a rolling pin or your 
fingertips, flatten and push the dough evenly out 
from the center to form a 9-inch circle (or a 7 x 11inch 
rectangle or rough oval). 
7. Line a baking sheet with parchment paper, and 
sprinkle with flour. Place the dough on top. Cover 
with another sheet of parchment, and sprinkle with 
flour. Roll out and stack the remaining dough balls. 

8. Wrap the baking sheet with plastic wrap; refrigerate 
the pizza dough until ready to use, up to 1 day, 
or freeze up to 1 month (thaw in the refrigerator before 
using). 

pizza sauce 

MAKES ABOUT 4 CUPS; 

MAKES ENOUGH FOR SIX 9-INCH PIZZAS 

2 cans (28 ounces each) whole 
peeled plum tomatoes 


1/4 cup olive oil 

3 sprigs oregano 

4 teaspoons coarse salt 

1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 

1. Crush the tomatoes with your hands in a large 
bowl. Heat the oil in a large skillet over medium 
heat until hot but not smoking. Add the crushed 
tomatoes, oregano, salt, and pepper, and reduce 
heat to medium-low. Cook, stirring occasionally, 
until thickened, 40 to 50 minutes. 
2. Pass the sauce through a food mill into a bowl; 
discard the solids. (Alternatively, process sauce in 
a food processor until smooth.) If not using immediately, 
refrigerate the sauce in an airtight container 
up to 1 week, or freeze up to 1 month. 
SANDWICHES AND SAVORY PIES 209 


grilled pizzas with leeks, 
asparagus, and mushrooms 

MAKES SIX 9-INCH PIZZAS 

2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil, 
plus more for brushing 


2 medium leeks, halved lengthwise, cut into 
thin half-moons, and rinsed well 

8 ounces shiitake mushrooms, stemmed 
and cut into  -thick slices 


8 ounces thin asparagus, trimmed and cut 
into 1  pieces 


1/4 cup dry white wine 

1 tablespoon finely chopped fresh thyme, 
plus more for garnish 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

Pizza Dough (page 208) 

4 ounces Taleggio or other soft cheese 
(such as Camembert or Brie), sliced 


Truffle oil, for drizzling (optional) 

1. Heat the olive oil in a large skillet over medium 
heat until hot but not smoking. Add the leeks; cook, 
stirring, until beginning to soften, about 5 minutes. 
Add the mushrooms; cook until tender and juices 
have evaporated, about 4 minutes. Add the asparagus 
and wine; cook until the asparagus is 
bright green and the wine has evaporated, about 2 
minutes. Stir in the thyme; season with salt and pepper. 
Set aside. 
2. Heat a grill until medium-hot. Generously brush 
one side of the pizza dough with olive oil; grill, oiled 
side down, until the underside is golden brown and 
the top begins to bubble, 3 to 5 minutes. Quickly 
brush the top with olive oil; flip the crust. Top with 
a thin layer of cheese and some of the asparagus 
mixture. Grill until the cheese is just melted, the 
topping is hot, and the crust is cooked through, 3 
to 5 minutes more. 
3. Slide the pizza with a large spatula onto a cutting 
board. Season with salt and pepper. Sprinkle 
with more thyme and with a small amount of truffle 
oil, if desired. Repeat to make more pizzas. 
grilled pizzas with 
plums, prosciutto, goat cheese, 
and arugula 


MAKES SIX 9-INCH PIZZAS 

Cornmeal Pizza Dough (page 209) 

Extra-virgin olive oil 
8 ounces soft goat cheese, crumbled 


4 ounces prosciutto, cut into thin strips 

2 large plums or apricots, pitted and cut 
into thin wedges 


2 bunches arugula, trimmed 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


1. Heat a grill until medium-hot. Generously brush 
one side of the pizza dough with oil; grill, oiled side 
down, until the underside is golden brown and the 
top begins to bubble, 3 to 5 minutes. Quickly brush 
the top with oil; flip the crust. Top with some of the 
cheese, prosciutto, and plums. Grill until the toppings 
are hot and the crust is cooked through, 3 to 
5 minutes more. 
2. Slide the pizza with a large spatula onto a cutting 
board. Drizzle the arugula with oil in a large bowl, 
and toss. Drizzle the pizza with oil; top with some of 
the arugula (or serve it on the side). Season with salt 
and pepper. Repeat to make more pizzas. 
grilled pizzas with 
tomato, avocado, and 
pepper jack cheese 

MAKES SIX 9-INCH PIZZAS 

1/2 medium red onion, finely chopped 
1 pint cherry or grape tomatoes, quartered 


2 avocados, preferably Hass, pitted 
and coarsely chopped 


2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil, 
plus more for brushing 


1/3 cup fresh lime juice (about 3 limes), 
plus lime wedges for serving (optional) 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

Cornmeal Pizza Dough (page 209) 

4 ounces coarsely grated pepper Jack 
cheese (about 11/3 cups) 


Sour cream, for garnish (optional) 

210 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


1. Toss the onion, tomatoes, and avocados with oil 
and lime juice in a medium bowl. Season with salt 
and pepper; set aside. 
2. Heat a grill until medium-hot. Generously brush 
one side of the pizza dough with oil; grill, oiled side 
down, until the underside is golden brown and the 
top begins to bubble, 3 to 5 minutes. Quickly brush 
the top with oil; flip the crust. Top with a layer of 
cheese. Grill until melted and the crust is cooked 
through, 3 to 5 minutes more. 
3. Slide the pizza with a large spatula onto a cutting 
board. Season with salt and pepper. Top with 
avocado mixture. Dot with sour cream and serve 
with limes, if desired. Repeat to make more pizzas. 
grilled quattro formaggi pizzas 

MAKES SIX 9-INCH PIZZAS 

This Italian classic typically showcases four 
cheeses ("quattro formaggi") with different characteristics. 
For our rendition, we topped the crust 
with fontina (semifirm), mozzarella (soft and 
fresh), Gorgonzola (blue-veined), and Pecorino 
Romano (hard and aged). 

Pizza Dough (page 208) 

Extra-virgin olive oil 

4 ounces coarsely grated fontina cheese 
(about 11/3 cups) 


1 pound fresh mozzarella, thinly sliced 
4 ounces Gorgonzola cheese, crumbled 
(about 1 cup) 
4 ounces Pecorino Romano, thinly shaved 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1. Heat a grill until medium-hot. Generously brush 
one side of the pizza dough with oil; grill, oiled side 
down, until the underside is golden brown and the 
top begins to bubble, 3 to 5 minutes. Quickly brush 
the top with oil; flip the crust. Top with a thin layer 
of all four cheeses. Grill until just melted and the 
crust is cooked through, 3 to 5 minutes more. 
2. Slide the pizza with a large spatula onto a cutting 
board. Season with salt and pepper. Repeat to 
make more pizzas. 
summer squash lattice tart 

SERVES 6 

All-purpose flour, for work surface 

1/2 recipe Martha's Perfect Pate Brisee 
(page 647) 


2 medium green zucchini (about 10 ounces) 

2 medium yellow squash (about 10 ounces) 
2 tablespoons unsalted butter 


2 large leeks (about 12 ounces), white part 
only, cut into   dice 


Salt and freshly ground pepper 

1/2 cup grated Gruyere cheese (1 ounce) 
1 large whole egg 


1 large egg yolk 
1/4 cup heavy cream 


Olive oil, for brushing 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Have ready a 41/2 x 14inch 
bottomless rectangular tart form or one with 
a removable bottom on a parchment-lined baking 
sheet. On a lightly floured surface, roll the dough 
into a 7 x 16-inch rectangle. Fit the dough into the 
mold, and trim the sides flush with the top of the 
mold. Transfer the shell to the freezer to chill for 20 
minutes. 
2. Remove the shell from the freezer, prick the bottom 
with a fork, and line with parchment paper cut 
to fit. Fill with dried beans or metal pie weights. 
Bake until the crust is just beginning to brown, 
about 15 minutes. Remove from the oven, and remove 
the beans or weights. Return the crust to the 
oven, and bake until golden brown, about 10 minutes 
more. Remove from the oven, and set aside 
on a wire rack. 
3. Using a mandoline or vegetable peeler, very 
thinly slice 1 green zucchini and 1 yellow squash 
lengthwise. Place the slices in a colander in a single 
layer, and sprinkle lightly with salt. Place the 
colander in a bowl; let drain for 30 minutes. 
4. Cut the remaining zucchini and squash into 1/3inch 
dice. Melt the butter in a large skillet over high 
heat. Add the leeks and squash, and season with 
salt and pepper. Cook until golden brown but still 
firm, about 8 minutes. Evenly distribute the cooked 
vegetables in the crust. Sprinkle the Gruyere on top. 
SANDWICHES AND SAVORY PIES 211 


5. Place the salted squash slices in between double 
layers of paper towels. Gently press down to remove 
as much liquid as possible. Alternating squash colors, 
weave a lattice pattern over the top of the 
cheese and vegetables, covering the entire surface. 
Trim or tuck in the ends to fit. 
6. In a medium bowl, whisk together the egg, egg 
yolk, and cream, and season with salt and pepper. 
Lift the edges of the lattice in several places, and 
pour in the egg mixture. Using a pastry brush, coat 
the lattice with olive oil. Bake, loosely covered with 
aluminum foil, until the custard is set, 30 to 35 minutes. 
Remove the lattice tart from the oven, and place 
on a wire rack to cool slightly before serving. 
red and golden beet cheese tart 

MAKES ONE 9 x 1  TART 

All-purpose flour, for dusting 

11/2 disks Martha's Perfect Pate Brisee 
(page 647) 

11/2 pounds (without greens) red, golden, 
and Chioggia beets 

2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil, plus 
more for drizzling 


Coarse salt 

1 pound soft goat cheese, room temperature 
4 ounces fresh ricotta cheese (scant 1/2 cup) 

2 teaspoons finely chopped fresh thyme, 
plus about 1 teaspoon whole leaves 


Freshly ground pepper 

1/2 cup grated fontina cheese 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. On a lightly floured 
surface, place 11/2 disks pate brisee next to each 
other; roll out to 1/8 inch thick. Press firmly into a 
9 x 1  rimmed baking sheet, leaving a   
overhang on all sides. Tuck the edges of dough 
under to create a double thickness; press firmly 
against the pan. Prick the dough with a fork. Refrigerate 
30 minutes. 
2. Line the shell with parchment or foil; fill with pie 
weights or dried beans. Bake until golden brown, 
about 30 minutes. Transfer to a wire rack. Remove 
the weights and parchment. Let the shell cool completely. 
(Leave oven on.) 
3. Trim all but 1/2 inch of stems from the beets; rinse. 
Toss with the oil and 1 teaspoon salt. Transfer to a 
rimmed baking sheet; cover tightly with foil. Roast 
until the beets are tender, 45 to 60 minutes. When 
cool enough to handle, peel the beets with a paring 
knife. Cut into thin rounds. 
4. Raise oven temperature to 425 degrees F. Stir together 
the goat cheese, ricotta, and chopped thyme until 
well combined; season with pepper. Spread the mixture 
over the tart shell, filling all the way to edges. 
5. Arrange the beets over the cheese mixture, overlapping 
the slices slightly and alternating colors. 
Lightly season with salt. Sprinkle the fontina and 
whole thyme leaves on top. Lightly drizzle with oil, 
and then season with pepper. Bake until golden 
brown, about 25 minutes. Serve warm. 
pasta, prosciutto, 
and potato pie 

SERVES 6 

13/4 pounds russet potatoes (3 to 4 medium) 
2 tablespoons unsalted butter, softened 

2 scallions, white and light-green parts, 
finely chopped 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1 cup whole milk 
1 cup heavy cream 


1 small dried red chile, crumbled 
4 large eggs 


4 large egg yolks 
1/4 cup sour cream 


11/2 cups grated Parmesan cheese 
1/4 teaspoon freshly grated nutmeg 

2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
1 shallot, finely chopped 


1/2 large bunch Swiss chard (14 ounces), 
stemmed and coarsely chopped 


3/4 pound penne, cooked according 
to package instructions 
1/4 pound prosciutto, thinly sliced 
into   strips 


3 tablespoons fresh oregano, 
coarsely chopped 


212 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Bake the potatoes on 
a rimmed baking sheet until tender, about 45 minutes. 
Let cool slightly. Peel the potatoes; discard the 
skin. Mash with a potato masher. Stir the potatoes, 
butter, and scallions in a medium bowl; season with 
salt and pepper. Press the potato mixture evenly 
into the bottom of a 9-inch springform pan. Bake 
until light golden, 25 to 30 minutes. Let cool on a 
wire rack. 
2. Bring the milk and cream to a boil in a medium 
saucepan over medium-high heat, stirring occasionally. 
Remove from heat; stir in the chile. Whisk 
in the eggs, egg yolks, sour cream, Parmesan, and 
nutmeg. Season with salt and pepper; set aside. 
3. Heat the oil in a large skillet over medium heat. 
Add the shallot; cook, stirring occasionally, until 
light golden, about 2 minutes. Add the chard; cook, 
stirring occasionally, until wilted, 3 to 4 minutes. 
Season with salt and pepper. 
4. Stir the pasta, Parmesan mixture, chard mixture, 
prosciutto, and oregano in a large bowl. Spread over 
the crust. Bake until golden brown and set, about 
45 minutes. Let cool slightly before serving. 
buttermilk-leek galette 

MAKES ONE 9-INCH TART 

All-purpose flour, for work surface 
1 sheet frozen puff pastry from a standard 
package (17.3 ounces), thawed 
2 tablespoons unsalted butter 


5 leeks, white and pale-green parts only, 
washed well, and cut crosswise into 
 -thick pieces 


1/4 cup nonfat buttermilk 
2 teaspoons Dijon mustard 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
5 ounces fresh goat cheese, crumbled 


1 large egg yolk 

1 tablespoon heavy cream or water 

1. Line a baking sheet with parchment paper, and 
set a 9-inch tart ring (about 2 inches deep) on top; 
set aside. On a lightly floured work surface, roll out 
the puff pastry to about 1/8 inch thick. Using a sharp 
paring knife, trim the dough to a 1  round, and 
lay it over tart ring. Fit into the ring, and fold in the 
edges against the inside of the ring, pressing gently 
to seal. Refrigerate 20 minutes. 
2. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees  F. In a large nonstick 
skillet set over medium heat, melt the butter. Add 
the leeks; cook, stirring, until soft, about 7 minutes. 
Add the buttermilk and mustard, and cook until 
slightly thickened, about 2 minutes. Season with 
salt and pepper. Remove from heat; set aside. 
3. To assemble the tart, layer the goat cheese and 
the leek mixture on the chilled pastry, ending with 
goat cheese. In a small bowl, beat together the egg 
yolk and cream. Brush the pastry with egg wash, and 
bake until golden, about 35 minutes. Serve warm. 
fresh green tart 

MAKES ONE 131/2 x 4-INCH TART 

You can substitute any variety of ripe tomato for 
the heirlooms called for here. 

Almond Tart Dough (recipe follows) 

2 teaspoons sherry vinegar 
1 teaspoon extra-virgin olive oil 


1 green bell pepper, ribs and seeds 
removed, diced 


1 English cucumber, peeled, halved, 
and seeds removed, cut crosswise into 
 -thick half-moons 


2 small green heirloom tomatoes, quartered 

2 scallions, white and pale-green parts only, 
cut diagonally into   pieces 


Coarse salt and freshly ground black 
pepper 


Almond-Arugula Pesto (recipe follows) 

1/4 cup fresh chervil, for garnish 
Toasted whole almonds, for garnish 


1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Press the tart dough 
into a 131/2 x 4-inch rectangular tart pan with a removable 
bottom. Using a fork, lightly prick all over 
the bottom of the dough. Refrigerate 20 minutes. 
SANDWICHES AND SAVORY PIES 213 


2. Remove the tart shell from the refrigerator. Line 
with parchment paper; fill with pie weights or dried 
beans. Bake until the edges start to brown, about 15 
minutes. Remove the parchment and weights; continue 
baking until the crust is golden, 8 to 10 minutes 
more. Transfer to a wire rack, and let cool 
completely. 
3. In a medium bowl, whisk together the vinegar 
and oil. Add the bell pepper, cucumber, tomato, and 
scallions; toss together. Season with salt and black 
pepper. 
4. Spread the pesto evenly over the bottom of the 
tart shell. Arrange the vegetable mixture on top. 
Garnish with chervil and almonds. 
almond tart dough 

MAKES ENOUGH FOR ONE 

131/2 x 4-INCH TART 

1 cup all-purpose flour 

3 tablespoons whole almonds, toasted 

2 tablespoons sesame seeds, toasted 

11/4 teaspoons salt 
1/4 teaspoon ground coriander 

1/4 teaspoon ground cumin 

6 tablespoons chilled unsalted butter, cut 
into small pieces 


1 large egg yolk 

2 tablespoons ice water 

1. In a food processor, pulse the flour, almonds, 
sesame seeds, salt, and spices. Add the butter and 
process until the mixture resembles coarse meal. 
With the machine running, add the egg yolk and 
ice water through the feed tube in a slow, steady 
stream. Process until the dough just comes together 
(do not overprocess). 
2. Turn out the dough onto a clean work surface. 
Flatten into a disk. Wrap in plastic; chill at least 1 
hour or overnight. 
almond-arugula pesto 

MAKES ENOUGH FOR ONE 

131/2 x 4-INCH TART 

1/4 cup whole almonds, toasted 

3/4 cup arugula, rinsed well 
1/4 cup fresh flat-leaf parsley leaves 
1 tablespoon creme fraiche 
3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 


2 teaspoons fresh lemon juice 
1 garlic clove 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

In a food processor, pulse all the ingredients except 
salt and pepper until smooth. Season with salt and 
pepper. The pesto can be refrigerated in an airtight 
container for up to 2 days. 

lighter chicken potpie 

SERVES 6 

1 tablespoon unsalted butter, 
plus 1/4 cup melted butter 


2 medium shallots, thinly sliced 

1 garlic clove, minced 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


11/2 cups reserved stock from Poached 
Chicken (recipe follows) 

2 tablespoons all-purpose flour 

4 medium carrots, cut on the diagonal 
into  -thick slices 


3 medium celery stalks, cut on the 
diagonal into  -thick slices 


Poached Chicken (recipe follows) 

3 tablespoons coarsely chopped fresh 
flat-leaf parsley, plus about 1/2 cup leaves 
for crust and sprigs for garnish 


1/2 teaspoon finely chopped fresh tarragon 

1/2 cup slightly thawed frozen peas 
6 sheets phyllo dough, thawed if frozen 


Flaked sea salt, for sprinkling (optional) 

1. Preheat the oven to 425 degrees F. Melt 1 tablespoon butter 
in a medium saucepan over medium heat. Add 
shallots, garlic, 1/2 teaspoon salt, and 1/4 teaspoon pepper. 
Cook, stirring occasionally, until shallots are 
translucent, about 3 minutes. Stir in 1 cup stock. 
214 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


Whisk remaining 1/2 cup stock into the flour in a small 
bowl. Whisk into shallot mixture. Bring to a boil, 
whisking constantly. Reduce to a simmer. Cook 5 
minutes, whisking occasionally. 

2. Add carrots and celery. Bring to a boil. Stir in 
chicken. Return to a boil. Remove from heat. Stir in 
chopped parsley and tarragon. Let cool. Stir in peas. 
Transfer to a 2-quart (8 1/2 x 1 ) baking dish. 
3. Brush 1 sheet of phyllo with melted butter. Sprinkle 
with parsley. Repeat with remaining phyllo, parsley, 
and butter; do not sprinkle parsley on final layer. 
(Keep unbuttered phyllo covered with plastic wrap and 
a damp kitchen towel.) Drape the crust over the cooled 
filling; tuck in the edges. Cut four 4-inch slits in the 
crust for vents. Sprinkle with sea salt, if desired. 
4. Bake until crust is golden brown and juices are 
bubbling, about 30 minutes. Remove from oven, and 
recut vents. Serve immediately in shallow bowls. 
poached chicken 

MAKES ENOUGH FOR 1 POTPIE 

1 whole chicken (about 4 pounds), cut 
into 8 pieces 


2 celery stalks, cut into 4-inch pieces 

2 medium carrots, peeled and cut 
into 4-inch pieces 


1 medium onion, quartered 
6 sprigs fresh flat-leaf parsley 


3 sprigs fresh thyme 
1/4 teaspoon whole black peppercorns 


2 cans (14 ounces each) low-sodium 
store-bought chicken broth 


1 teaspoon coarse salt 

1. Place chicken in a large stockpot. Add remaining 
ingredients and enough water to cover chicken. 
Bring to a boil over high heat. Skim off any foam and 
discard. Reduce heat to low; simmer until chicken 
has just cooked through, about 25 minutes. 
2. Transfer chicken to a plate, and let cool slightly. 
Pour stock through a fine sieve into a bowl; discard 
solids. Set aside 1 1/2 cups stock for potpie; reserve remaining 
stock for another use. Remove meat from 
skin and bones, and tear into bite-size pieces. (You 
should have about 4 cups.) Refrigerate, covered, until 
ready to use, up to 2 days. 
alsatian potato pie 

SERVES 6 

3 Yukon Gold potatoes (about 11/2 pounds), 
peeled and cut into  -thick rounds 


Coarse salt 
1 cup heavy cream 


5 garlic cloves, crushed with the 
flat side of a large knife 


1/2 teaspoon freshly grated nutmeg 
Freshly ground pepper 


2 tablespoons unsalted butter 

1 medium leek, white and light-green 
parts only, halved lengthwise, thinly 
sliced crosswise, and washed well 


1/4 cup chopped fresh flat-leaf parsley 
1 large egg yolk 


1 package (14 ounces) frozen puff pastry 
(such as Dufour), thawed 


All-purpose flour, for work surface 
11/2 cups grated Comte or Gruyere cheese 

1. Cover the potatoes with water in a medium 
saucepan. Bring to a boil over high heat. Add a 
pinch of salt; cook until just tender, 13 to 15 minutes. 
Drain. Let cool. 
2. Bring 3/4 cup plus 3 tablespoons cream, the garlic, 
and the nutmeg to a boil in a small saucepan 
over medium-high heat. Cook until reduced by half. 
Season with salt and pepper; set aside. 
3. Melt the butter in a skillet over medium heat. Add 
the leek; cook, stirring occasionally, until softened, 
about 5 minutes. Remove from heat. Stir in the parsley; 
season with salt and pepper. Set aside. 
4. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Whisk the egg yolk 
and remaining tablespoon cream in a small bowl; 
set aside. Divide the puff pastry on a lightly floured 
SANDWICHES AND SAVORY PIES 215 


surface into 2 6 x 1  rectangles. Set 1 rectangle 
on a baking sheet lined with parchment paper. 
Add half of the potatoes, leaving a   border 
all around and overlapping the potatoes slightly. 
Top with half of the leek mixture and 3/4 cup cheese; 
season with salt and pepper. Repeat the layering 
with the remaining potatoes, leeks, and cheese. 

5. Brush the edges of the dough with egg wash. 
Cover with the remaining dough rectangle; gently 
press edges with a fork to seal. Cut   slits 
lengthwise in the center of the crust, 2 inches apart. 
Brush with egg wash. Refrigerate until cold, about 
30 minutes. 
6. Bake the pie until golden brown and puffy, about 
35 minutes. Remove from the oven. Pour the cream 
mixture into the pie vents with a funnel. Bake 10 
minutes more. Let stand 15 minutes before serving. 
cherry tomato, bocconcini, 
and zucchini pie 

SERVES 4 TO 6 

2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
1 shallot, finely chopped (about 1/4 cup) 


1 small zucchini (71/2 ounces), halved 
lengthwise and cut crosswise into  thick 
half-moons 

11/2 pounds cherry tomatoes, plus cherry 
tomatoes on the vine for garnish 

1/2 cup grated Parmesan cheese 

4 ounces bocconcini 
3 tablespoons fresh basil, chopped 


1 teaspoon finely grated lemon zest 

1/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons all-purpose flour, 
plus more for work surface 


1 tablespoon sugar 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


Cheese Short Crust, made with Parmesan 
cheese (recipe follows) 

1 tablespoon heavy cream 
1 large egg yolk 


1. Heat 1 tablespoon oil in a medium skillet over 
medium heat. Add the shallot; cook, stirring occasionally, 
until softened, about 3 minutes. Add the 
zucchini; cook, stirring occasionally, until it is light 
golden and the liquid has been released, about 5 
minutes. Transfer to a large bowl; set aside. 

2. Halve one-third of the tomatoes. Stir the halved 
and whole tomatoes, cheeses, basil, lemon zest, 
flour, and sugar into the shallot-zucchini mixture. 
Season with salt and pepper. Set aside. 
3. Roll out the dough on a lightly floured surface to 
a 1  circle, about 1/4 inch thick. Make 7  long 
cuts around the edge of the dough, evenly 
spaced. Trim to make 7 rounded flaps. Transfer to 
a 10-inch pie plate. Drizzle the crust with the remaining 
tablespoon oil. Spread with the filling. Fold 
in the flaps of crust, slightly overlapping. Put the 
tomatoes on the vine in the center. Refrigerate until 
cold, about 20 minutes. 
4. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Whisk the cream and 
egg yolk in a small bowl. Brush the crust with egg 
wash. Bake the pie on a rimmed baking sheet until 
the crust is golden brown and the juices are bubbling, 
about 45 minutes. 
cheese short crust 

MAKES ENOUGH FOR ONE 10-INCH PIE 

21/4 cups all-purpose flour 

1/2 cup grated Manchego or Parmesan 

cheese 

Pinch of sugar 

1 teaspoon coarse salt 

3/4 cup (11/2 sticks) cold unsalted butter 
cut into pieces 
1 egg yolk 
1/4 to 1/2 cup ice water 


Pulse the flour, cheese, sugar, salt, and butter in a 
food processor until the mixture resembles coarse 
meal. Add the egg yolk; pulse to combine. With the 
processor running, drizzle in 1/4 cup water until the 
dough just comes together. (If the dough is still 
crumbly, add up to 1/4 cup more water, 1 tablespoon 
at a time.) Do not process for more than 20 seconds. 
Wrap the dough in plastic. Refrigerate until cold, 
about 30 minutes. 

216 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


pasta, rice, 


AND 

grains 



soba noodles with 
vegetables and mint 

SERVES 4 

Coarse salt 

8 ounces sugar snap peas, trimmed, strings 
removed 

12 ounces soba noodles 

1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon toasted 
sesame oil 


1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon peanut oil 

2 medium carrots (about 1/2 pound), peeled 
and shaved into thin strips using a 
vegetable peeler 


1 teaspoon minced peeled fresh ginger 
4 scallions, thinly sliced crosswise 


1 tablespoon tamari soy sauce 
1/4 cup coarsely chopped fresh mint 


Freshly ground pepper 

1. Prepare an ice-water bath; set aside. Bring a large 
(8-quart) pot of water to a boil; add salt. Add the 
peas; cook until bright green and crisp-tender, 
about 2 minutes. Using a slotted spoon, immediately 
transfer the peas to the ice-water bath to stop 
the cooking; drain. 
2. Return the water to a boil; cook the noodles according 
to package instructions. Drain. Rinse the 
noodles with cold water; drain. 
3. Transfer the noodles to a large bowl. Add the oils; 
toss to combine. Add the reserved peas and the carrots, 
ginger, scallions, tamari soy sauce, and mint; 
season with pepper. Toss to combine. Serve at room 
temperature. 
soba noodles with 
tofu, avocado, and snow peas 


SERVES 4 

1   piece fresh ginger, peeled and 
sliced into very thin strips 


1 serrano or jalapeno pepper, seeded 
and sliced into very thin strips 


1/4 cup sugar 

3 tablespoons fresh lime juice 
(about 3 limes) 


2 tablespoons low-sodium soy sauce 

1 package (14 ounces) extra-firm tofu, 
cut into   cubes and patted dry 


1 package (about 8 ounces) soba noodles 
4 ounces snow peas, thinly sliced 


1 teaspoon vegetable oil 

1 English cucumber, peeled, halved 
crosswise, then sliced lengthwise into 
thin strips 


10 to 12 chives, cut into   pieces 

1 ripe avocado, pitted, peeled, and sliced 
2 tablespoons sesame seeds 


1. In a small saucepan, bring the ginger, chile, sugar, 
and 1/3 cup water to a boil. Reduce heat to low; cook 
until ginger and chile are soft, about 5 minutes. Use 
a slotted spoon to transfer the ginger and chile to 
a bowl; set aside. Reserve syrup. 
2. Make the dressing: In a shallow bowl, whisk together 
the lime juice, soy sauce, and 2 teaspoons reserved 
syrup. Add the tofu; toss to coat. Set aside. 
3. In a pot of boiling water, cook the noodles according 
to package instructions. Drain; transfer to 
a large bowl. Add the peas; drizzle with the oil and 
1 tablespoon dressing. Toss to coat; let cool. 
4. To serve, add the cucumber, chives, tofu, and 
dressing to the bowl; toss to combine. Divide 
among plates; top with the avocado and reserved 
ginger and chile. Sprinkle with sesame seeds. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 547 CALORIES, 20 G 

FAT, 0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 75 G CARBOHYDRATE, 822 MG 

SODIUM, 28 G PROTEIN, 7 G FIBER 

218 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


pasta with scallops, garlic, 
grape tomatoes, and parsley 

SERVES 4 

Coarse salt 

1 pound linguine or spaghetti 

5 tablespoons olive oil 

4 garlic cloves, thinly sliced 
1/2 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes 


1 pound bay or sea scallops, tough 
muscles removed 


1 pint container ripe grape tomatoes 

Freshly ground black pepper 

2 tablespoons chopped fresh flat-leaf 
parsley, plus more for garnish 


1 tablespoon unsalted butter 

1. Bring a large pot of water to a boil, and add salt 
generously. Add the pasta; cook until al dente according 
to package instructions. Drain in a colander, 
reserving 1/4 cup cooking water. 
2. Heat the oil in a large saute pan over medium-
high heat. Add the garlic and red pepper flakes; 
toast until lightly golden and fragrant, about 1 
minute. Transfer the garlic to a small bowl; set aside. 
3. Add the scallops to the pan (if using sea scallops, 
cut in half); saute until opaque, about 2 minutes. 
Add the tomatoes, and cook, stirring frequently, 
until the skins begin to split, 2 to 3 minutes; crush 
a few with the back of the spoon. Season with salt 
and pepper. Remove from heat. 
4. Add the pasta, parsley, reserved cooking water, 
and butter; toss to combine. Divide among bowls, 
and serve immediately; garnish with reserved garlic 
and parsley. 
spinach linguine 
with walnut-arugula pesto 


SERVES 6 

The pesto can be made up to 1 hour before serving 
without losing its freshness; store it at room 
temperature. 

2 small garlic cloves 

3 ounces walnut pieces (about 3/4 cup), 
toasted and cooled 


4 ounces arugula, trimmed and 
roughly chopped 


1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 

1 ounce Parmesan cheese, finely grated 
(about 1/3 cup) 


1 pound spinach linguine 
1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil 


Freshly ground pepper 

1. In the bowl of a food processor fitted with the 
metal blade, pulse the garlic until very finely 
chopped. Add the walnut pieces and arugula; 
process until a coarse paste forms, about 5 seconds. 
Transfer to a serving bowl. Stir in the salt and 
Parmesan cheese, and set aside. 
2. Bring a large pot of water to a boil. Add the linguine, 
and cook until al dente according to package 
instructions, about 8 minutes. Drain in a 
colander, and immediately add to the bowl with the 
walnut-arugula mixture. Drizzle with the oil, and 
season with pepper. Toss thoroughly until coated 
evenly. Serve immediately. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 415 CALORIES, 13 G FAT, 

4 MG CHOLESTEROL, 59 G CARBOHYDRATE, 826 MG 

SODIUM, 16 G PROTEIN, 9 G FIBER 

PASTA, RICE, AND GRAINS 219 


spaghetti with 
garden vegetables 

SERVES 6 TO 8 

3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

2 large carrots, peeled and finely chopped 
1 small red onion, finely chopped 


2 large celery stalks, peeled and finely 
chopped 


2 garlic cloves, crushed with the flat 
side of a large knife 


1 cup torn fresh basil leaves 

1 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes 

Coarse salt 
1/2 cup dry white wine 


2 small yellow summer squash, halved 
lengthwise and cut into  -thick 
half-moons 


2 small zucchini, halved lengthwise and cut 
into  -thick half-moons 

2 small eggplants, cut into   cubes 

3 medium tomatoes, coarsely chopped 
2 teaspoons chopped fresh marjoram 


Freshly ground pepper 
1 pound spaghetti or bucatini 


Freshly grated Parmesan cheese, 

for serving 

1. Stir together the oil, carrots, onion, celery, and garlic 
in a large saucepan. Cook over medium-low heat 
2 minutes. Add 1/2 cup basil, the red pepper flakes, 
and 1 teaspoon salt. Cover. Cook, stirring often, until 
the vegetables are caramelized, about 15 minutes. 
2. Add the wine to the saucepan. Raise heat to 
medium. Cook until the wine has almost completely 
reduced, about 5 minutes. Add the yellow squash, 
zucchini, and eggplants. Cook 5 minutes. Add the 
tomatoes. Cover. Cook until the vegetables are tender, 
10 to 12 minutes. Add the marjoram and 1/2 teaspoon 
salt; season with pepper. 
3. Bring a large pot of water to a boil; add salt. Add 
the pasta; cook until al dente. Drain. Transfer to a 
large bowl. Add the vegetable mixture and remaining 
1/2 cup basil to the pasta. Toss to combine. 
Serve with Parmesan cheese. 
spaghetti with clams 

SERVES 4 

Coarse salt 

1 pound spaghetti 
2 tablespoons olive oil 


2 garlic cloves, minced 

1 small dried chile, crumbled, or pinch of 
red pepper flakes 


11/2 pounds littleneck clams, scrubbed 
1 cup dry white wine 

2 tablespoons coarsely chopped fresh flat-
leaf parsley, plus whole leaves for garnish 

Juice of 1 lemon 

3 tablespoons unsalted butter 
Freshly ground black pepper 


1. Bring a large pot of water to a boil; salt generously. 
Add the spaghetti, and cook until slightly 
underdone, about 7 minutes. Drain the pasta, reserving 
1 cup of the cooking liquid. Set aside. 
2. Meanwhile, heat the oil in a large skillet over 
medium heat. Add the garlic and chile; cook until 
the garlic is golden, about 2 minutes. Add the clams 
and white wine, and raise heat to high. Bring to a 
boil; cover, and cook, shaking occasionally, 2 to 3 
minutes, until the clams open. Stir in the parsley. 
Transfer to a bowl; set aside. 
3. Return the skillet to medium-high heat. Add the 
reserved pasta water and lemon juice; reduce until 
slightly thickened, about 2 minutes. Remove from 
heat; whisk in the butter. Add the clam mixture and 
spaghetti. Cook over medium-low heat until heated 
through, 2 to 3 minutes. Season with salt and pepper; 
garnish with parsley. 
220 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


spaghetti alla carbonara 

SERVES 4 TO 6 

Coarse salt 

1 pound spaghetti 
4 ounces pancetta, coarsely chopped 


2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
3 garlic cloves, minced 


4 large eggs 
1/2 cup freshly grated Parmesan cheese 


1/4 cup freshly grated Pecorino Romano 
cheese 


Freshly ground pepper 

1. Bring a large pot of water to a boil; add salt. Add 
the pasta; cook until al dente. Drain. While the pasta 
cooks, cook the pancetta in a large skillet over 
medium-high heat, stirring occasionally, until 
golden brown, 6 to 7 minutes. Using a slotted spoon, 
transfer the pancetta to a bowl. 
2. Reduce heat to medium-low. Add the oil to skillet; 
heat until hot but not smoking. Add the garlic; 
cook until golden, about 3 minutes. Lightly beat the 
eggs in a large serving bowl; set aside. Add the pasta 
to skillet; toss. Transfer to the eggs. Add the cheese 
and pancetta; toss. Season with pepper. 
NOTE The eggs in this dish are not fully cooked; it 
should not be prepared for pregnant women, babies, 
young children, the elderly, or anyone whose health 
is compromised. 

ravioli stuffed with fava 
beans, ricotta, and mint with 
brown butter sauce 

MAKES ABOUT 31/2 DOZEN; SERVES 6 TO 8 

You can substitute fresh or frozen peas for the 
fava beans. Drain the ricotta in a sieve set over a 
bowl for about 10 minutes to remove excess liquid. 
Try to find the denser buffalo ricotta for this 
recipe. If you use regular ricotta, the filling won't 
be as thick. 

3 cups shelled fresh fava beans (3 pounds 
in pods) 


10 ounces ricotta cheese (preferably buffalo 
ricotta), drained in a sieve 


1/2 cup finely grated Parmesan cheese, plus 
more for sprinkling 


1/3 cup finely chopped fresh mint 
1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice 


Coarse salt 
Fresh Pasta Dough (recipe follows) 


All-purpose flour, for dusting 
Yellow cornmeal, for dusting 


1 stick (8 tablespoons) unsalted butter 
Freshly ground pepper 


1. Bring a large pot of water to a boil; add the beans. 
Cook until tender, 6 to 7 minutes. Transfer to an ice-
water bath; let cool 1 minute. Drain; squeeze the 
beans from the skins. Transfer 2 cups of the beans 
to a food processor. Add the cheeses, mint, lemon 
juice, and 3/4 teaspoon salt. Process until smooth. 
Refrigerate the filling at least 1 hour (up to 2 days). 
2. Divide the dough into 4 pieces. Dust 1 piece of 
dough with flour (cover the remaining pieces with 
plastic wrap). Set the rollers of a pasta maker to the 
widest setting; roll the dough through. Fold the 
dough into thirds; pass through again, narrow side 
first. Repeat until smooth, 3 or 4 more times. Run 
the dough through progressively narrower settings, 
using additional flour as needed, until very thin (at 
least 5 inches wide). Cut the sheet crosswise into 
manageable pieces. 
PASTA, RICE, AND GRAINS 221 


3. Dust 2 rimmed baking sheets with cornmeal; set 
aside. Place 1 piece of pasta sheet on a lightly 
floured work surface (keep the unused pieces covered). 
Space heaping tablespoons of filling 3 inches 
apart on lower half of sheet. 
4. Using a wet pastry brush, moisten the pasta 
around each mound of filling. Fold the top half of 
the sheet over the filling to meet the edge; press 
around the mounds to eliminate air and to seal. 
5. Cut the pasta into 21/2- to   squares using a 
pizza wheel. Brush away excess flour. Place the ravioli 
on cornmeal-dusted baking sheets. Roll out the 
remaining pasta dough, and repeat. (If serving that 
day, cover the ravioli with plastic wrap, and refrigerate 
on baking sheets until ready to use. If making 
ahead, freeze on baking sheets until firm, about 
1 hour, and then transfer to an airtight container; 
freeze until ready to use, up to 1 month.) 
6. Bring a large pot of water to a boil; add salt. Add 
half the ravioli; gently stir once. Cook at a gentle 
boil until the ravioli are just tender, 3 to 5 minutes. 
Transfer to a colander using a slotted spoon; drain. 
Cover to keep warm. Repeat with remaining ravioli. 
7. Meanwhile, melt 4 tablespoons butter in a large 
skillet over medium heat. Reduce heat to low; cook 
the butter until lightly browned, 3 to 4 minutes. Add 
half the ravioli to the skillet; toss to coat. Using a 
slotted spoon, transfer the ravioli to a platter; cover 
to keep warm. Repeat with the remaining ravioli. 
8. Cook the remaining 4 tablespoons butter until 
lightly browned as above. Add the reserved cup 
beans; cook over low heat until warm, about 20 seconds. 
Transfer the ravioli to serving plates. Spoon 
the beans and butter over ravioli. Sprinkle with 
cheese; season with salt and pepper. 
fresh pasta dough 

MAKES 1 POUND 

2 cups all-purpose flour, plus more for 
dusting 


4 large eggs 

1. Mound the flour on a clean work surface; make 
a well in the center. Crack the eggs into the well; 
beat lightly with a fork. Gradually bring small 
amounts of flour into the well, incorporating it into 
the eggs using the fork. When most of flour has 
been incorporated, fold in the remaining flour using 
a bench scraper. 

2. On a clean work surface lightly dusted with flour, 
knead the dough until smooth and elastic, about 10 
minutes. Wrap in plastic; let stand at room temperature 
11/2 hours (or refrigerate overnight) before 
rolling out. The dough can be frozen in an airtight 
container up to 1 month. 
spicy whole-wheat linguine 
with red peppers 

SERVES 6 

1 pound whole-wheat linguine 

1/2 cup extra-virgin olive oil 
1 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes 


4 garlic cloves, minced 
4 medium red bell peppers, cut lengthwise 
into  -thick strips 
1 teaspoon coarse salt 


1. Bring 6 quarts water to a boil in a large pot. Add 
the pasta; cook according to package instructions 
until al dente. 
2. Meanwhile, heat the oil, red pepper flakes, and 
garlic in a medium saucepan over medium heat, 
stirring occasionally, until the oil is hot but not 
smoking, about 2 minutes. Add the bell pepper 
strips, and cook until very soft, about 20 minutes. 
3. Drain the pasta well. Rinse with warm water; 
shake out excess. Return the pasta to the pot. Stir 
salt into the bell pepper mixture; add to the pasta, 
and toss well to coat. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 447 CALORIES, 19 G FAT, 

0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 63 G CARBOHYDRATE, 396 MG SODIUM, 

12 G PROTEIN, 11 G FIBER 

222 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


penne with basil 
and caciocavallo 

SERVES 4 

If you have trouble finding caciocavallo cheese, 
you can substitute grated Parmigiano-Reggiano. 

3 cups loosely packed fresh basil leaves, 
torn, plus more for garnish 


2 garlic cloves, peeled, crushed with the flat 
side of a large knife 

1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil, plus more for 
drizzling 


Coarse salt 
1 pound penne 


2 cups grated caciocavallo cheese, plus 
more for sprinkling and serving 


21/2 teaspoons cracked black pepper 

1. Stir together the basil, garlic, and oil in a serving 
bowl; let stand 30 minutes. Bring a large pot of 
water to a boil; add salt. Add the pasta; cook until 
al dente. Reserve 1/2 cup cooking liquid; drain the 
pasta. 
2. Add the hot pasta, cheese, pepper, and reserved 
cooking liquid to the basil mixture; toss well. Sprinkle 
with cheese, and drizzle with oil; garnish with 
basil. Serve with more cheese. 
trofie with pesto, 
green beans, and potatoes 


SERVES 4 TO 6 

12 ounces fingerling or small new potatoes, 
cut into  -thick rounds or pieces 


Coarse salt 
1 pound trofie (or fusilli or penne) 


4 ounces green beans, trimmed and halved 
crosswise 


Pesto (recipe follows) 

Freshly ground pepper 
Freshly grated Parmesan cheese, for serving 


1. Cover the potatoes with cold water by 2 inches 
in a medium saucepan. Bring to a boil; add salt. Reduce 
heat to medium; simmer the potatoes until 
tender, about 10 minutes. Drain. 
2. Bring one large pot and one medium pot of water 
to a boil; add salt to both. Add the pasta to the large 
pot; cook until al dente. Add the green beans to the 
medium pot; cook until tender, 5 to 6 minutes. Drain 
the pasta and green beans. 
3. Heat the pesto in a large skillet over medium heat 
until warm. Stir in the potatoes, pasta, and green 
beans; cook until heated through. Season with salt 
and pepper. Serve with cheese. 









pesto 

MAKES ABOUT 11/4 CUPS 

3 cups loosely packed fresh basil leaves 

2 tablespoons pine nuts, toasted 
1 garlic clove 


1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 

3/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
2 tablespoons freshly grated Parmesan 
cheese 


Freshly ground pepper 

Process the basil, pine nuts, garlic, and salt in a food 
processor until combined. With the processor running, 
add the oil in a slow, steady stream; process 
until smooth. Stir in the cheese. Season the pesto 
with pepper. The pesto can be refrigerated, covered 
by a thin layer of olive oil in an airtight container, 
up to 1 week. 

PASTA, RICE, AND GRAINS 223 








basic potato gnocchi

SERVES 4 TO 6 

2 cups all-purpose flour, plus more for 
dusting 


2 pounds Yukon Gold or russet potatoes 

1 tablespoon plus 21/2 teaspoons coarse salt 

2 large eggs 

1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 

1. Lightly flour a baking sheet; set aside. Put the potatoes 
in a large saucepan, and cover with cold 
water by 2 inches. Bring to a boil; add 1 tablespoon 
salt. Reduce to a simmer; cook until the potatoes 
are very tender, about 25 minutes. 
2. Drain the potatoes. When they are cool enough 
to handle, peel them, then pass them through a ricer 
or food mill into a medium bowl. Sprinkle with the 
flour, and add the eggs. Sprinkle with the remaining 
21/2 teaspoons salt and the pepper. Stir mixture 
with a fork to combine well. 
3. Turn out the dough onto a lightly floured surface; 
gently knead until it is soft and smooth, about 3 
minutes. Divide the dough into 4 to 6 pieces. Roll 
each piece into a long rope about 3/4 inch thick. Cut 
the ropes crosswise into   gnocchi. 
4. Roll a cut side of each dumpling against the tines 
of a fork with your thumb (forming ridges on one 
side and an indentation on the other). Set aside on 
the floured baking sheet until ready to cook. 
spinach gnocchi 
with tomato sauce 

SERVES 4 TO 6 

1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil 

1 small onion, finely chopped 

3 garlic cloves, minced 
1/4 cup dry white wine 


1 can (28 ounces) whole plum tomatoes 
with juice, coarsely chopped 


1 can (141/2 ounces) tomato sauce 

2 sprigs basil 

1/4 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes 

1 tablespoon coarse salt, plus more for 
seasoning 


Freshly ground pepper 

Basic Potato Gnocchi, made with spinach 
(recipe above) 

Thinly shaved Parmesan cheese, for 

serving 

1. Heat the oil in a large saucepan over medium 
heat until hot but not smoking. Add the onion and 
garlic; cook, stirring occasionally, until onion is 
translucent, 5 to 7 minutes. Add the wine; cook until 
224 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


  

PASTA, RICE, AND GRAINS 225 


most of the liquid has evaporated. Add the tomatoes 
and juice, tomato sauce, basil, and red pepper 
flakes. Reduce heat to medium-low; simmer until 
slightly thick, about 30 minutes. Season with salt 
and pepper. Remove from heat; cover to keep warm. 

2. Bring a large pot of water to a boil; add the salt. 
Add half the gnocchi; when they rise to the top 
(after about 2 minutes), continue to cook until tender, 
about 15 seconds more. Transfer the gnocchi 
with a slotted spoon to the pan with sauce. Repeat 
the process with the remaining gnocchi. 
3. Reheat the gnocchi over low heat; gently toss. 
Serve with cheese shavings. 
gnocchi with mushrooms 
and gorgonzola sauce 

SERVES 4 TO 6 

3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil, plus 
more for brushing 


1 tablespoon coarse salt, plus more for 
seasoning 


Basic Potato Gnocchi (page 224) 

1 cup heavy cream 

1 cup homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock 


4 ounces Gorgonzola cheese 
Pinch of freshly grated nutmeg 


Pinch of cayenne pepper 
Freshly ground pepper 


12 ounces assorted mushrooms, such as 
chanterelle, cremini, and portobello, 
stemmed and coarsely chopped 


1. Lightly brush a rimmed baking sheet with oil; set 
aside. Bring a large pot of water to a boil; add the 
salt. Add half the gnocchi; when they rise to the top 
(after about 2 minutes), continue to cook until tender, 
about 15 seconds more. Transfer the gnocchi 
with a slotted spoon to the oiled baking sheet. Repeat 
the process with the remaining gnocchi. 
2. Bring the cream and stock to a boil in a large 
saucepan over medium-high heat. Reduce heat, and 
let the mixture simmer until slightly thickened and 
reduced by one-third, about 10 minutes. Add the 
cheese; stir until melted. Stir in the nutmeg and 
cayenne. Season with salt and pepper. Remove from 
heat; cover to keep warm. 

3. Heat the oil in a large skillet over medium heat 
until hot but not smoking. Add the mushrooms, and 
cook, stirring occasionally, until they are tender and 
any released liquid has evaporated, about 4 minutes. 
Add the gnocchi; cook, stirring occasionally, 
until heated through. Pour the Gorgonzola sauce 
over the gnocchi; gently toss. 
orecchiette with 
green tomatoes, caramelized 
onions, and corn 


SERVES 6 TO 8 

2 tablespoons unsalted butter 

1 large Vidalia or other sweet onion, cut 
into  -thick slices 


2 pounds green tomatoes (about 6 
medium), coarsely chopped 


3 tablespoons sugar 

1 cup fresh corn kernels (about 2 ears) 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


1 tablespoon chopped fresh thyme 

1 pound orecchiette or other short, dried 
pasta, cooked according to package 
instructions 


1. In a large skillet over medium heat, melt the butter. 
Add the onion, and cook, stirring, until it begins 
to soften, about 6 minutes. Add the tomatoes, and 
sprinkle the sugar over the mixture. Cook, stirring, 
until the tomatoes are tender and golden brown, 
about 20 minutes. 
2. Add the corn; season with salt and pepper. Cook, 
stirring, until the corn is tender and just starting 
to brown, about 4 minutes. Stir in the thyme. 
3. Add the vegetable mixture to the cooked pasta, 
and stir until combined. Serve immediately. 
226 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


rigatoni with sausage 
and broccoli rabe 

SERVES 4 TO 6 

7 garlic cloves (3 quartered and 4 crushed) 

1/4 cup plus 3 tablespoons extra-virgin 
olive oil 


Coarse salt 

1 medium bunch broccoli rabe 
(about 1 pound), trimmed 


1/2 cup sun-dried tomatoes in olive oil, 
drained 


1 small dried red chile, crumbled, or 
1/4 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes 


1 pound sweet Italian sausages with fennel, 
cut into  -thick pieces 

12 plum tomatoes, seeded and cut 
into 4 wedges (or 4 cups canned whole 
plum tomatoes, drained and seeded, 
cut into 4 wedges) 


1 pound rigatoni, cooked 

Freshly ground pepper 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Place the quartered 
garlic in the center of a square of foil lined with 
parchment paper. Fold up the edges of the foil to 
form sides. Drizzle the garlic with 3 tablespoons oil, 
and season with salt. Fold the foil up over the garlic 
to seal, forming a pouch. Transfer to a baking 
sheet. Roast the garlic until soft and golden brown, 
about 20 minutes. 
2. Bring a large pot of water to a boil; add salt. Add 
the broccoli rabe, and cook until bright green, 1 to 
2 minutes. Drain. Cut crosswise into   pieces; 
set aside. Puree the sun-dried tomatoes in a blender. 
Transfer to a small bowl; set aside. 
3. Cook the remaining 1/4 cup oil and the crushed 
garlic, the chile, and a pinch of salt in a large skillet 
over medium heat until fragrant, 1 to 2 minutes. 
Add the sausage; cook, stirring often, until browned, 
about 10 minutes. 
4. Stir in the broccoli rabe, sun-dried-tomato puree, 
and plum tomatoes. Cook until the liquid has reduced, 
10 to 12 minutes more. 
5. Toss the cooked pasta with roasted garlic. Stir 
the pasta mixture into the sauce in the skillet. Season 
with salt and pepper. 
gratineed macaroni 
and cheese with tomatoes 


SERVES 6 TO 8 

You can use six 2-cup gratin dishes to make individual 
servings. The baking time will be a bit 
shorter; cook until bubbling and golden. 

7 tablespoons unsalted butter, plus 
more for dish 


11/4 cups small pieces torn baguette or other 
crusty bread 

1 tablespoon chopped fresh thyme 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


1 pound elbow macaroni or other short, 
tubular pasta 


1 quart milk 
5 tablespoons all-purpose flour 


Pinch of freshly grated nutmeg 

4 cups grated sharp white Cheddar cheese 
(about 1 pound) 


1 pound red and yellow tomatoes in all 
sizes, cut into   pieces if large or 
halved if small (cherry, grape, or pear) 


1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Butter a 9 x 1  
baking dish or a 3-quart casserole dish; set aside. 
Melt 2 tablespoons butter, and pour over the bread 
in a medium bowl; toss. Add 1 teaspoon thyme, 
1/2 teaspoon salt, and 1/4 teaspoon pepper; toss. 
2. Bring a large pot of water to a boil; add salt. Cook 
the pasta until just beginning to soften, 2 to 3 minutes 
(it will not be fully cooked). Drain and rinse. 
3. Warm the milk in a saucepan over medium heat. 
Heat the remaining 5 tablespoons butter in a high-
sided skillet (or a pot) over medium until foaming. 
Add the flour; whisk 1 minute. Slowly whisk in the 
warm milk. Cook, whisking, until bubbling and 
thickened, 8 to 10 minutes. Remove from heat. 
4. Add 2 teaspoons salt, 1/2 teaspoon pepper, the 
remaining 2 teaspoons thyme, the nutmeg, and 
cheese to pan; stir until the cheese is melted. 
5. Stir the pasta and tomatoes into the cheese sauce. 
Pour into the buttered dish; sprinkle with the bread 
topping. Bake until bubbling and golden, about 30 
minutes. Let cool slightly before serving. 
PASTA, RICE, AND GRAINS 227 


whole-wheat pasta with 
lentils, spinach, and leeks 

SERVES 4 

If you like, grate some Parmesan cheese over the 
tossed pasta just before serving, or offer grated 
cheese on the side. 

2 cups (14 ounces) French green lentils 

2 garlic cloves 
1 dried bay leaf 


1 pound small whole-wheat chiocciole or 
other small tubular pasta 


2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

4 leeks (about 13/4 pounds), white and 
light-green parts only, sliced into   
rounds, washed well and drained 


1 teaspoon chopped fresh thyme 

11/2 teaspoons coarse salt 
Freshly ground black pepper 

8 ounces baby spinach, washed 

1. In a medium saucepan, combine the lentils, 1 garlic 
clove, and the bay leaf. Add enough cold water 
to cover by 2 inches. Bring to a boil over medium-
high heat. Reduce heat to medium-low, and simmer 
until the lentils are tender, 20 to 25 minutes. Drain, 
and discard the garlic clove and bay leaf; set the 
lentils aside. 
2. Bring a large pot of water to a boil. Add the pasta; 
cook until al dente, according to package instructions, 
about 7 minutes. Drain the pasta, reserving 
1 cup cooking liquid. Place the pasta in a large bowl. 
3. Meanwhile, mince the remaining garlic clove. 
In a large saute pan, heat the oil over medium heat. 
Add the minced garlic, leeks, and thyme; cook, stirring 
occasionally, until the leeks are soft but not 
browned, about 5 minutes. Add the cooked lentils 
and salt; season with pepper. 
4. Add the spinach and reserved cooking liquid to 
the pan; toss to wilt the spinach, about 2 minutes. 
Pour the mixture over the pasta, tossing to combine. 
Serve immediately. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 638 CALORIES, 9 G FAT, 

0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 120 G CARBOHYDRATE, 793 MG 

SODIUM, 29 G PROTEIN, 11 G FIBER 

rice noodles 
with chinese broccoli and 
shiitake mushrooms 


SERVES 4 

Similar greens-such as yow choy, also known as 
choy sum (which looks almost identical to bok 
choy but bears small yellow flowers), broccolini, 
or even regular broccoli-will work well in this 
dish if you can't find Chinese broccoli. You can 
buy wide rice noodles at Asian grocery stores, or 
use the narrow rice noodles (often labeled "pad 
thai noodles") that many supermarkets carry. 

8 ounces wide (about 3/8 inch) or other rice 
noodles 


12 ounces Chinese broccoli (also called gai 
lan), cut into   pieces 


3 tablespoons low-sodium tamari soy sauce 

1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon Thai fish 
sauce (also called nam pla) 


1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon rice wine 
vinegar (not seasoned) 


1 teaspoon sugar 

3/4 cup homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock 
1 tablespoon canola oil 
1 tablespoon minced peeled fresh ginger, or 
more to taste 
2 garlic cloves, minced 

8 shiitake mushrooms, stemmed, caps 
quartered 


2 teaspoons cornstarch mixed with 2 
tablespoons cold water 


4 scallions, white and pale-green parts only, 
cut on the diagonal into   pieces 

2 teaspoons toasted sesame oil 

Crushed red pepper flakes, for sprinkling 
(optional) 

Sesame seeds, for sprinkling (optional) 
Coarse salt, for sprinkling (optional) 

1. Cover the noodles with very hot water in a large 
bowl, and let soak 30 minutes. Drain the noodles, 
and set aside. 
2. Meanwhile, bring a large pot of water to a boil. 
Add the broccoli; cook until crisp-tender, about 1 
minute. Drain; set aside. 
228 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


3. Stir together the tamari, fish sauce, vinegar, sugar, 
and stock in a small bowl; set aside. Heat the canola 
oil in a large nonstick skillet or a wok over medium 
heat until hot but not smoking. Add the ginger, garlic, 
and mushroom caps; cook, stirring, until the 
mushrooms are soft, about 2 minutes. 
4. Add the tamari mixture to the skillet; bring to a 
simmer over high heat. Stir in the cornstarch mixture, 
and simmer 2 minutes. Add the reserved noodles 
and broccoli, along with the scallions, and toss 
to coat. Drizzle with the sesame oil, and toss again. 
Serve with red pepper flakes, sesame seeds, and salt 
for sprinkling, if desired. 
pasta with fennel, 
sardines, and pine nuts 

SERVES 4 

1 pound penne, trenette, or other short 
pasta 


2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

1/4 cup pine nuts 
1 onion, finely chopped 


2 fennel bulbs, trimmed and thinly sliced, 
plus 1/4 cup green fronds 


4 garlic cloves, finely chopped 

1 teaspoon coarse salt 
Freshly ground pepper 


2 cans (3.75 ounces each) sardines packed 
in olive oil 


Grated zest and juice of 1 lemon, plus 

1 lemon for serving 

1. Bring a large pot of water to a boil. Cook the pasta 
until al dente, according to package instructions, 
about 8 minutes. 
2. Meanwhile, combine the oil and pine nuts in a 
large saute pan. Cook over medium heat, stirring 
occasionally, until the nuts are lightly toasted, 3 to 
4 minutes. 
3. Add the onion, sliced fennel, garlic, and salt to 
pan; season with pepper. Cook, stirring occasionally, 
until the onion is soft and light golden, 9 to 10 
minutes. Add the sardines; stir in the lemon zest 
and juice. Chop the reserved fennel fronds; stir into 
the mixture. 
4. Drain the pasta, reserving about 1/4 cup cooking 
liquid. Add the pasta to the mixture in the pan along 
with enough cooking water to coat; toss to combine. 
Divide among 4 serving plates; grate lemon zest 
over each. Serve immediately. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 571 CALORIES, 17 G FAT, 

20 MG CHOLESTEROL, 73 G CARBOHYDRATE, 548 MG 

SODIUM, 28 G PROTEIN, 13 G FIBER 

pasta verde 

SERVES 4 

2 tablespoons grainy mustard 
2 tablespoons white wine or sherry vinegar 


1/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons extra-virgin 
olive oil 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
1 pound gemelli or other short pasta 


1 sweet onion, halved lengthwise, then cut 
crosswise 1/4 inch thick 


2 small zucchini, halved lengthwise, 
then cut crosswise 1/4 inch thick 


8 ounces snap peas, tough strings removed 

3 ounces baby spinach (or 1 bunch 
regular spinach, stems trimmed and 
leaves coarsely chopped) 


1 small bunch scallions, thinly sliced 
(about 1/2 cup) 


1/4 cup packed fresh basil leaves, cut into 
very thin strips 


1. In a medium bowl, whisk together the mustard 
and vinegar. While whisking, slowly drizzle in 1/4 
cup oil until emulsified. Season with salt and pepper. 
Set aside. Cook the pasta in a large pot of boiling 
salted water until al dente, according to package 
instructions, about 8 minutes. Drain; return to pot. 
Set aside. 
2. Meanwhile, heat the remaining 2 tablespoons oil 
in a large skillet over medium heat. Add the onion; 
cook until just softened, about 4 minutes. Add the 
zucchini; cook, stirring, until tender, about 4 minutes. 
Add the snap peas and spinach; cook, stirring, 
until bright green, about 2 minutes. Remove from 
heat; stir in the scallions and basil. Add to the pasta 
along with the vinaigrette; toss. Serve warm or at 
room temperature. 
PASTA, RICE, AND GRAINS 229 


broccoli with orecchiette 

SERVES 4 

Broccoli, a cruciferous vegetable, contains significant 
amounts of vitamins A and C, as well as calcium, 
iron, and riboflavin. 

8 ounces orecchiette (ear-shaped pasta) 

1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil 
2 garlic cloves, minced 


1 bunch (about 11/2 pounds) broccoli, 
stalks peeled and trimmed, stalks and 
florets roughly chopped 


1 teaspoon coarse salt 
Freshly ground black pepper 


2 tablespoons freshly grated Pecorino 
Romano cheese 


1. Bring a large stockpot of water to a boil. Add the 
pasta, and cook until al dente, stirring occasionally 
to keep the pasta from sticking, about 8 minutes. 
Transfer to a colander to drain, reserving 1/2 cup 
cooking liquid. Set the pasta aside. 
2. Heat 1 teaspoon olive oil in a large skillet over 
medium heat. Add the garlic; saute until golden, 
stirring to avoid burning, about 2 minutes. Add the 
broccoli and reserved cooking liquid; cook, stirring, 
until the broccoli is tender and bright green, about 
3 minutes. Add the salt, and season with pepper. 
Remove from heat. 
3. Add the reserved pasta to the pan, and toss well 
to coat. Transfer to 4 serving bowls; drizzle each 
with 1/2 teaspoon olive oil, and garnish each serving 
with 11/2 teaspoons grated cheese. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 284 CALORIES, 5 G FAT, 

4 MG CHOLESTEROL, 49 G CARBOHYDRATE, 801 MG SODIUM, 

12 G PROTEIN, 5 G FIBER 

butternut squash ravioli 
with fried sage leaves 

MAKES ABOUT 24 RAVIOLI; SERVES 4 

13/4 cups Roasted Squash Puree, made with 
butternut squash (recipe follows) 

6 tablespoons unsalted butter 
1/2 cup chopped shallots (about 3) 


11/2 tablespoons chopped fresh sage, plus 24 
whole sage leaves for garnish 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

Pinch of ground nutmeg 
1/2 cup semolina, for dusting 


Fresh Pasta Dough (page 222) 
All-purpose flour, for dusting 


1/4 cup olive oil 

1/4 cup freshly grated Parmesan cheese, 
for garnish (2 ounces) 


1. In a small saucepan, cook the squash puree over 
medium heat, stirring frequently, until it stops releasing 
moisture and is reduced to 11/4 cups, 10 to 
12 minutes. Transfer to a small bowl to cool. 
2. In a small saucepan, melt 2 tablespoons butter 
over medium heat. Add the shallots; cook, stirring, 
until soft and beginning to brown, 3 to 5 minutes. 
Add the chopped sage; cook, stirring, 1 minute 
more. Remove from heat; combine with the squash. 
Season with salt and pepper; stir in the nutmeg. Let 
cool completely. 
3. Generously dust 2 baking sheets with semolina; 
set aside. Divide the pasta dough into 4 pieces; 
cover the unused pieces with plastic wrap to keep 
them from drying out. Dust a piece of dough lightly 
with flour. Using a pasta maker, roll the dough 
through the widest opening. Fold the dough into 
thirds, and pass it through machine again, layered 
side first. Repeat process three or four more times, 
until the dough is smooth. Continue running the 
dough through the remaining settings, using additional 
flour sparingly, until the pasta sheet is very 
thin. The dough should be at least 5 inches wide. 
4. Place the dough on a lightly floured surface; 
halve crosswise. Cover half with plastic wrap. On 
the other half, place scant tablespoons of squash 
filling 1 inch apart in 2 rows. Using a pastry brush 
230 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


dipped in water, lightly moisten the pasta around 
each mound of filling. Top with the remaining half-
sheet of pasta; press around the mounds to eliminate 
the air inside and to seal. Cut the pasta into 
2  squares. Brush away excess flour. Place the 
ravioli on the prepared baking sheets. Repeat with 
the remaining dough and filling. 

5. In a small saucepan, heat the oil over medium-
high heat. Drop a few sage leaves at a time into the 
hot oil, and fry until the oil around the leaves stops 
bubbling but before the leaves brown, about 5 seconds. 
Using a slotted spoon, transfer to a paper-
towel-lined plate; set aside. 
6. Bring a large stockpot of water to a boil. Add salt 
and the ravioli. Gently stir once, and cook at a gentle 
boil until the ravioli have floated to the top and 
are just tender, 3 to 5 minutes. Using a slotted 
spoon, divide evenly among 4 plates. 
7. In a small saucepan, melt the remaining 4 tablespoons 
butter over medium heat, and cook until 
lightly browned and aroma is nutty, 6 to 8 minutes. 
Drizzle over the ravioli, and garnish with cheese 
and fried sage leaves. Serve immediately. 
roasted squash puree 

MAKES ABOUT 21/4 CUPS 

3 pounds squash, such as butternut, 
orange Hokkaido, or buttercup, halved 
and seeded 


Canola oil, for baking sheet 

1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees  F. Place the squash 
halves, skin side up, on an oiled rimmed baking 
sheet. Bake until fork tender, about 11/4 hours. Remove 
from the oven. Turn over; let stand until cool 
enough to handle. 
2. Scoop the flesh into a food processor, and discard 
the skin. Puree until smooth. Refrigerate the 
squash puree in an airtight container up to 4 days, 
or store in the freezer up to 1 month. 
pasta with peas, crab, and basil 

SERVES 6 TO 8 

Pappardelle are long, flat, wide noodles; fettuccine 
or linguine work just as well. We recommend 
chopping the peas slightly before cooking them; 
otherwise, they have a tendency to roll off the 
pasta when you eat. 

Coarse salt 

1 pound pappardelle 
4 tablespoons unsalted butter 


2 shallots, minced 

2 pounds garden peas, shelled and roughly 
chopped (2 cups) 
Freshly ground pepper 


1 pound lump crabmeat, rinsed and picked 
over 

1 cup heavy cream 

1/4 cup loosely packed fresh basil leaves, 
roughly chopped, plus more for garnish 


1. Bring a large saucepan of water to a boil, and generously 
add salt. Stir in the pasta; cook according 
to package instructions until it is al dente. Transfer 
to a colander, and let drain. 
2. Meanwhile, melt the butter in a large saute pan 
over medium heat. Add the shallots, and cook until 
they are translucent and fragrant, about 2 minutes. 
Add the peas, and season with salt and pepper; cook 
until the peas are tender and bright green, 4 to 5 
minutes. Add the crab, and continue cooking, stirring 
constantly, until it is heated through, about 1 
minute more. Add the pasta, and stir to combine. 
3. Stir in the cream and basil, and cook until the 
mixture is just heated through. Remove from heat; 
season with salt and pepper. Divide among serving 
plates, and garnish with basil. Serve immediately. 
PASTA, RICE, AND GRAINS 231 


linguine with 
two-olive tapenade 

SERVES 4 

The tapenade can also be served as a dip for crudites 
or a zesty sauce for grilled fish. For best results, 
choose olives with distinctive flavors, such 
as those suggested below. 

1/2 pound linguine 

1/3 cup pitted brine-cured olives, such as 
kalamata (about 16) 


1/3 cup pitted ripe green olives, such as 
Picholine (about 18) 


Finely grated zest of 1 lemon 

2 garlic cloves 

2 tablespoons plus 1/3 cup roughly chopped 
fresh flat-leaf parsley, plus whole sprigs 
for garnish 


1/2 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper 

1/4 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes 

1 6-ounce can tuna packed in water, 
drained 


11/2 cups cherry tomatoes, quartered 

1. Bring a large pot of water to a boil. Add the linguine; 
cook according to package instructions, stirring 
occasionally, until it is al dente. Remove from 
heat, and transfer the linguine to a colander; let 
drain, reserving 1/4 cup cooking water. 
2. Make the tapenade: In the bowl of a food processor 
fitted with the metal blade, combine the olives, 
lemon zest, garlic, 2 tablespoons parsley, black pepper, 
and red pepper flakes. Process until the mixture 
is finely chopped and combined. 
3. Transfer the linguine to a large serving bowl, 
and toss with the reserved cooking water. Add the 
tapenade, tuna, tomatoes, and remaining 1/3 cup 
chopped parsley; toss well to coat. Serve immediately, 
garnished with parsley sprigs. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 365 CALORIES, 9 G FAT, 

13 MG CHOLESTEROL, 51 G CARBOHYDRATE, 912 MG 

SODIUM, 19 G PROTEIN, 5 G FIBER 

oyster mushroom 
and chard ravioli 

SERVES 6 

13/4 cups homemade or low-sodium store-
bought chicken stock 

1/2 ounce dried oyster mushrooms 
1 small bunch ruby chard (8 ounces) 


1 sprig fresh thyme 
2 teaspoons olive oil 


1 ounce thinly sliced prosciutto 
1 small onion, finely chopped 


2 tablespoons grated Parmesan cheese 
36 wonton wrappers, thawed if frozen 


Pinch of coarse salt 

1. Bring the stock and 1/2 cup water to a simmer in 
a small saucepan. Add the mushrooms. Let stand 
until soft, about 20 minutes. Remove the mushrooms 
with a slotted spoon, and transfer to a work 
surface; coarsely chop. Set aside. Pour the soaking 
liquid through a fine sieve into a medium bowl; discard 
the solids. Return the soaking liquid to the pan; 
set aside. 
2. Separate the leaves from the stems of the chard; 
reserve the stems. Coarsely chop the leaves. (You 
should have about 4 cups leaves.) Set aside. Cut the 
stems into   dice. Add the stems and thyme 
to the soaking liquid in the pan, and bring to a simmer. 
Remove from heat; let stand 10 minutes. Pour 
through a fine sieve into a medium bowl. Reserve 
1/4 cup simmered chard stems for garnish; discard 
the remaining solids. Cover the broth, and set aside. 
3. Heat the oil in a large skillet over medium heat. 
Add the prosciutto; cook, stirring occasionally, until 
crisp, about 5 minutes. Transfer to a plate. Add the 
onion to the skillet; cook, stirring occasionally, until 
translucent, about 3 minutes. Stir in the mushrooms 
and chard leaves. Cook, stirring occasionally, until 
the chard is wilted, about 5 minutes. Transfer to a 
medium bowl; let cool completely. Coarsely chop 
the prosciutto; stir into the chard mixture. Add the 
Parmesan, and stir to combine. 
4. Working with a few wrappers at a time, put 1 
heaping tablespoon mixture onto the center of each 
wrapper. Brush the edges with water. Top each filled 
232 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


wrapper with another wrapper. Press the edges and 
centers to seal. (Uncooked ravioli can be frozen in 
a single layer on a baking sheet and then stored in 
a resealable plastic bag up to 1 month.) 

5. Bring a large pot of water to a boil. Add salt. Add 
the ravioli in batches; cook until they rise to the top 
and are heated through, about 3 minutes. Carefully 
transfer 3 ravioli to each serving bowl; cover. Repeat 
with remaining ravioli. 
6. Bring the broth to a simmer. Spoon 1/4 cup broth 
into each bowl; garnish with reserved chard stems. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 194 CALORIES, 4 G FAT, 
10 MG CHOLESTEROL, 32 G CARBOHYDRATE, 666 MG 
SODIUM, 8 G PROTEIN, 2 G FIBER 

pastitsio 

SERVES 10 TO 12 

for the meat sauce 

2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
2 white onions, cut into   dice 
2 pounds ground lamb 
2 teaspoons coarse salt 
2 teaspoons ground cinnamon 


1/2 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 
1/4 teaspoon ground nutmeg 
1/2 cup red wine 


1 6-ounce can tomato paste 
2 bay leaves 


for the bechamel 

1. To make the sauce, heat the olive oil in a large 
skillet with sides over medium heat. Add the onions, 
and cook until they begin to soften, about 3 minutes. 
Add the lamb, salt, cinnamon, pepper, and nutmeg. 
Cook, breaking into pieces, until the lamb is 
no longer pink. Add the wine, and cook until the 
liquid is almost evaporated. Stir in the tomato paste, 
bay leaves, and 2 cups water. Cover, and let simmer 
30 minutes, skimming the fat occasionally. Remove 
from heat, and set aside, covered. 
2. For the bechamel, melt the butter in a large 
saucepan over medium heat. When the butter is 
bubbling, add the flour and baking powder. Cook, 
stirring constantly with a wire whisk, for 1 minute. 
While whisking, slowly pour in the milk. Continue 
cooking, whisking constantly, until the mixture bubbles 
and becomes thick. Remove the pan from heat, 
and stir in the Parmesan, salt, black pepper, nutmeg, 
and cayenne pepper. Set aside, covered, until 
ready to assemble. 
3. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees  F. Butter a 9 x 1  
glass or other ovenproof baking dish; set aside. 
Bring a large saucepan of water to a boil. Add the 
pasta; cook 2 to 3 minutes less than manufacturer's 
instructions, until very al dente. Transfer to a colander; 
drain well. Stir the noodles into the meat mixture. 
Pour the meat and pasta mixture into the 
prepared pan. Spread bechamel over the mixture, 
and bake until the top is set and golden brown, 30 
to 40 minutes. Let sit 10 minutes before serving. 
6 tablespoons unsalted butter 
9 tablespoons all-purpose flour (1/2 cup plus 

1 tablespoon) 
2 teaspoons baking powder 
3 cups milk 
1 cup freshly grated Parmesan cheese 
2 teaspoons coarse salt 


1/4 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper 
1/4 teaspoon ground nutmeg 
Pinch of cayenne pepper 


to assemble 

Butter for the baking dish 

1 1-pound box curly elbow macaroni, 
uncooked 


BeCHAMEL BASICS 

This classic French sauce is used in many 
dishes, including souffles, croque monsieurs, 
and even macaroni and cheese. When making 
bechamel sauce, cook the roux (butter 
and flour mixture) long enough to avoid a 
floury taste, but don't let it brown. Whisking 
constantly while adding flour then milk prevents 
lumps from forming. 

PASTA, RICE, AND GRAINS 233 


baked mushroom linguine 

SERVES 10 TO 12 

4 ounces dried mushrooms (such as porcini 
or chanterelle) 


2 sprigs fresh rosemary 

2 sprigs fresh thyme, plus 2 teaspoons 
finely chopped 


7 tablespoons unsalted butter 
5 tablespoons all-purpose flour 


11/2 cups heavy cream 
1 onion, diced 

1 pound button mushrooms, stems removed, 
quartered 

1 pound shiitake mushrooms, stems 
removed, sliced 


21/2 teaspoons coarse salt 

1/2 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 
1 pound linguine, uncooked 


1/2 cup grated Romano cheese 

1. Place the dried mushrooms in a bowl, and pour 
4 cups boiling water over them. Let sit 30 minutes 
to allow flavors to infuse. Wrap the rosemary and 
thyme sprigs in cheesecloth, and tie with kitchen 
string; set aside. Lift out the mushrooms with a slotted 
spoon, and place in another bowl. Press the 
mushrooms to release any retained stock, and pour 
the liquid back into the bowl; set the mushrooms 
aside. Strain the mushroom liquid through a fine-
mesh sieve lined with a paper towel. You should 
have about 4 cups mushroom stock; set aside. 
2. Melt 5 tablespoons butter in a large saucepan 
over medium heat. When bubbling, add the flour. 
Cook, stirring, until the mixture begins to brown, 
about 3 minutes. While whisking, slowly pour in the 
mushroom stock. Continue cooking, whisking constantly, 
until the mixture bubbles and becomes 
thick. Stir in the cream and reserved herb bundle. 
Reduce to a gentle simmer, and cook 30 minutes, 
stirring occasionally, to allow flavors to infuse. 
3. Meanwhile, heat the remaining 2 tablespoons 
butter in a large skillet over medium heat. Add the 
onion, and cook until it begins to soften, about 3 
minutes. Add the button mushrooms, cook until 
they release their juices, and make room in the pan. 
Add the remaining mushrooms, and cook until all 
are tender, about 5 minutes. Add the mushroom 
sauce to the skillet, and stir to combine. Season with 
the salt and pepper, and set aside. 

4. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Bring a large pot of 
water to a boil. Add the pasta; cook 2 to 3 minutes 
less than manufacturer's instructions, until very al 
dente. Transfer the noodles to a colander, and rinse 
with cold water to stop the cooking. Stir the noodles 
into the mushroom mixture. Sprinkle with 
grated cheese, and bake until browned on top and 
mixture is bubbling, about 30 minutes. Transfer the 
dish to a wire rack to cool 5 minutes before serving. 
orzo with peas and mint 

SERVES 4 

1 cup orzo (Greek pasta) 

2 tablespoons unsalted butter 

1 shallot, minced (about 2 tablespoons) 

Zest of 1 lemon 

1 pound fresh peas, shelled, or 2 cups frozen 

peas 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

2 tablespoons freshly chopped mint 

1. Cook the orzo according to package directions. 
Melt the butter in a medium saucepan over medium 
heat. Add the shallot and lemon zest, and saute until 
translucent. 
2. Add the peas, and cook until bright green and 
tender, adding a little water if the shallots brown 
before peas are tender. 
3. Add the cooked orzo, season with salt and pepper, 
and toss to combine. Remove from heat, and 
stir in the mint. 
234 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


traditional lasagne bolognese 

SERVES 10 TO 12 

This lasagne was designed for a deep-dish baking 
pan. You can use a standard 9 x 1  baking 
pan, but you will have excess sauce; the sauce 
can be frozen and used over pasta another time. 
The lasagne can be assembled up to 1 day ahead 
and left to cool completely. Cover, unbaked, and 
refrigerate up to 1 day in advance, or freeze, unbaked, 
up to 3 weeks in advance. Defrost overnight 
in the refrigerator; bake as directed below. 

Bolognese Sauce (recipe follows) 

1 3-pound container ricotta cheese 

3 large egg yolks 

1 cup (about 3 ounces) grated Parmesan 
cheese 


1 tablespoon plus 11/2 teaspoons coarse salt 

1/4 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper 

1/4 teaspoon ground nutmeg 

Pinch of cayenne pepper 

2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

1 1-pound box uncooked lasagne noodles 

1 pound fresh mozzarella, sliced into 
  rounds 


1. Bring the sauce to room temperature. In a large 
bowl, whisk the ricotta, egg yolks, Parmesan, 11/2 teaspoons 
salt, black pepper, nutmeg, and cayenne 
pepper. Chill the filling until ready to assemble the 
lasagne. 
2. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees  F. Butter an 11 x 14 x 
  lasagne baking pan. Bring a large pot of 
water to a boil. Add the olive oil and the remaining 
tablespoon salt. One at a time, add the lasagne 
noodles; cook until al dente, 2 to 3 minutes less than 
the manufacturer's instructions. Remove the noodles 
with tongs; drain in a colander. 
3. Spread about 3 cups sauce on the bottom of the 
baking dish. Place a single layer of lasagne noodles 
over the sauce, overlapping them slightly. Spread 
about 2 cups sauce over the noodles and about half 
of the ricotta filling mixture over the sauce. 
4. Top with a layer of lasagne noodles, again slightly 
overlapping them. Repeat with more sauce and the 
remaining ricotta filling mixture. Top with a final 
layer of lasagne noodles. Spread a layer of sauce 
over the noodles, and finish with a layer of sliced 
mozzarella rounds. 

5. Bake until the sauce is bubbling and the cheese 
is melted, at least 1 hour. Cover with aluminum foil 
if the cheese starts to brown too early. Let the 
lasagne stand 10 to 15 minutes before serving. 
bolognese sauce 

MAKES ABOUT 3 QUARTS 

3 tablespoons unsalted butter 

3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
2 onions, cut into   dice 


3 stalks celery, cut into   dice 
3 carrots, peeled and cut into   dice 


2 pounds ground sirloin 
2 pounds ground veal 


1 quart whole milk 
2 cups red wine 


31/2 cups homemade or low-sodium store-
bought beef broth 

1 cup tomato paste 
11/2 teaspoons coarse salt 

3/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 
1. Heat the butter and olive oil in a large cast-iron 
or enamel pot over medium heat. 
2. Add the onions, and cook until they begin to 
soften, about 5 minutes. Add the celery and carrots, 
and cook until the vegetables are tender, 8 to 10 
minutes. Add the ground sirloin and veal, and cook, 
stirring occasionally, until the meat is no longer 
pink. Add the milk, and cook at a gentle simmer, 
skimming fat from surface, until the liquid has reduced 
by half, about 50 minutes. 
3. Add the wine, and simmer until liquid is reduced 
by half again, about 40 minutes. 
4. Add the beef stock, tomato paste, salt, and pepper; 
simmer gently until the sauce thickens, 40 to 
45 minutes. If using for lasagne, set aside to cool 
slightly before assembling. 
PASTA, RICE, AND GRAINS 235 


fettuccine with brussels 
sprout leaves, brown butter, and 
toasted walnuts 


SERVES 6 

To remove individual Brussels sprout leaves, cut 
the stem out of each sprout and gently ease apart 
all the leaves. 

1 teaspoon coarse salt, plus more for 
cooking water 


16 ounces fettuccine 

1/2 cup (1 stick) plus 3 tablespoons unsalted 
butter 


2 ounces walnuts 

1 medium red onion, sliced into thin wedges 
2 garlic cloves, minced 

1 pound Brussels sprouts, leaves separated 
1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 


1/2 teaspoon finely chopped fresh sage 
1/4 teaspoon finely chopped fresh thyme 


Freshly grated Parmesan cheese, for 
serving 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Bring a large saucepan 
of water to a boil; add salt. Add the pasta, and cook 
until al dente, 8 to 10 minutes. Drain, transfer to a 
medium bowl, and toss with 1 tablespoon butter. 
Cover, and keep warm while proceeding. 
2. Spread the walnuts on a baking sheet, place in 
the oven, and toast until fragrant, about 10 minutes. 
When cool enough to handle, chop coarsely; set 
aside. Place 1/2 cup butter in a small saucepan over 
medium-high heat. Cook until the butter begins 
to brown and is very fragrant, about 8 minutes. 
Strain, discarding the solids, into a glass measuring 
cup or a small bowl, and set aside. 
3. Heat the remaining 2 tablespoons butter in a 
large skillet over medium heat. Add the onion and 
garlic, and cook until they start to soften, about 2 
minutes. Add the sprout leaves, sprinkle with salt, 
pepper, and herbs, and continue cooking until the 
leaves are bright green and tender and the onions 
are translucent, 3 to 5 minutes. Add the pasta to the 
skillet, and drizzle with the brown butter. Toss to 
combine, and cook until warmed through, seasoning 
with salt and pepper if needed. Transfer to a 
serving dish, and garnish with walnuts and Parmesan 
cheese. Serve immediately. 

angel-hair pasta with sauteed 
oysters and chorizo 

SERVES 4 

3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

4 ounces dried, hot chorizo sausage, thinly 
sliced into rounds 


1/4 cup (1/2 stick) unsalted butter 

2 tablespoons all-purpose flour 
1/2 teaspoon paprika 


1/4 teaspoon freshly ground white pepper 
Pinch of cayenne pepper 


Coarse salt 
2 tablespoons sherry 


11/4 cups heavy cream 
2 dozen shucked fresh oysters, plus 2/3 cup 
strained oyster liquor 
8 ounces angel-hair pasta 

1/4 teaspoon finely grated orange zest 

1. Bring a large pot of water to a boil. Meanwhile, 
heat oil in a large saucepan over medium-high heat. 
Add chorizo. Cook, stirring, until crisp, about 3 minutes. 
Transfer to a plate lined with paper towels, and 
let drain. Wipe out pan. 
2. Melt butter in the pan over medium heat. Add 
flour, spices, and 1 teaspoon salt. Cook, whisking 
constantly, 3 minutes (do not brown). Add sherry, 
and cook, whisking, 1 minute. Whisk in cream and 
oyster liquor. Bring to a simmer, and whisk until 
thick, about 3 minutes. 
3. Add salt to boiling water; add pasta, and cook 
until al dente. Drain. Add oysters to sauce; gently 
poach until just cooked through, 1 to 2 minutes. Add 
pasta; toss. Divide among plates. Top with chorizo; 
sprinkle with orange zest. 
236 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


herbed spaetzle 

SERVES 4 

1 cup whole milk 

8 sprigs fresh thyme, plus 1 tablespoon 
thyme leaves 


1/4 cup packed fresh flat-leaf parsley 
3 large eggs 


11/2 cups all-purpose flour 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
3 tablespoons unsalted butter 

1. Bring milk and 4 thyme sprigs to a boil in a small 
saucepan. Remove from heat. Discard thyme. Transfer 
milk to a blender; add parsley, thyme leaves, and 
eggs. Blend until combined. 
2. Whisk flour and 11/2 teaspoons salt in a medium 
bowl. Gradually whisk in milk mixture until smooth. 
3. Bring a medium saucepan of salted water to a 
boil. Working with about 1/4 cup batter at a time, 
press batter through   holes of a colander or 
spaetzle maker into boiling water. Cook until spaetzle 
float to top, 1 to 2 minutes. Using a slotted spoon, 
transfer to an ice-water bath. Drain. 
4. Melt butter in a medium nonstick skillet over 
medium-high heat. Add half of the spaetzle; cook, 
stirring occasionally, until golden, about 6 minutes. 
Transfer to a bowl. Repeat. Season with salt and 
pepper. Garnish with remaining thyme. 
spicy squash pasta 

SERVES 4 TO 6 

2 pounds autumn squash, such as sugar 
pumpkin, calabaza, or butternut 


1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil, plus more for 
drizzling 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

2 small garlic cloves, minced 
1/2 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes 


1 teaspoon finely chopped fresh thyme 

1 teaspoon thinly sliced fresh sage 

1 teaspoon finely chopped fresh rosemary 
1 pound perciatelli or bucatini 


3 tablespoons coarsely chopped fresh flat- 
leaf parsley, plus leaves for garnish 


3/4 cup fresh ricotta cheese 
Freshly grated Parmesan cheese 
1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. If using pumpkin or 
calabaza, cut into wedges; if using butternut squash, 
cut in half. Remove seeds; reserve for another use. 
Drizzle with oil; season with salt and pepper. Place 
squash, cut side up, on a rimmed baking sheet lined 
with parchment paper. Bake 10 minutes. Flip 
squash; bake until very tender, 40 to 50 minutes 
more. Let cool slightly, about 10 minutes. Scoop 
flesh into a medium bowl; discard skins. 
2. Heat 2 tablespoons oil in a medium skillet over 
medium heat. Add garlic, a large pinch of salt, red 
pepper flakes, and 3/4 teaspoon each thyme, sage, and 
rosemary. Cook, stirring, until garlic is golden and 
fragrant, about 5 minutes. Add squash; cook, stirring 
and mashing with a spoon, until heated through. 
3. Meanwhile, bring a large pot of water to a boil. 
Add a pinch of salt. Add pasta; cook until al dente. 
Drain well. 
4. Heat remaining oil in a large skillet over medium 
heat. Add cooked pasta, parsley, and remaining 
thyme, sage, and rosemary. Season with salt. Toss 
to combine; cook until heated through. 
5. Divide pasta evenly among serving bowls. 
Top with squash mixture and ricotta, dividing 
evenly. Garnish with parsley; drizzle with oil. Serve 
with Parmesan. 
PASTA, RICE, AND GRAINS 237 


cold sesame noodles 

MAKES 5 SERVINGS 

1 package (101/2 ounces) dried udon noodles 

1 baby bok choy 
1/4 cup smooth peanut butter 


5 tablespoons toasted sesame oil 
3 tablespoons soy sauce 


1/4 cup rice wine vinegar (not seasoned) 
1 large garlic clove, minced 


2 teaspoons sugar 
1/2 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes 


Sesame seeds, for garnish 

1. Bring a large pot of water to a boil; cook the noodles 
according to package directions. Drain; let cool 
completely. 
2. Bring 3 cups water to a boil in a medium 
saucepan; boil the bok choy 30 seconds. Drain; rinse 
well. Let cool; coarsely chop. 
3. Whisk together the peanut butter, oil, soy sauce, 
vinegar, garlic, sugar, and red pepper flakes. Put the 
sauce, noodles, and bok choy into a bowl; toss well. 
Sprinkle with seeds. Refrigerate in an airtight container 
until ready to serve, up to 2 days. 
baked saffron rice 

SERVES 8 TO 10 

3 cups basmati rice 
51/2 cups water 

1 tablespoon coarse salt 
4 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 


1/4 teaspoon ground saffron, dissolved in 2 
tablespoons hot water 


1. Rinse the rice well; drain in a colander. Place in 
a deep nonstick pot or rice cooker with water and 
salt. Bring to a boil over high heat; reduce to a simmer. 
Cook until all the liquid is absorbed, 15 to 20 
minutes. 
2. Drizzle the oil over the top of the rice; stir gently 
with a wooden spoon. Gently press the rice into 
an even layer. Reduce heat to medium-low. Place a 
clean dish towel over the top of the pot; cover firmly, 
wrapping the sides of the towel around the top of 
the lid to prevent steam from escaping. Cook over 
medium-low heat for 50 to 60 minutes. Gently pull 
the rice away from the side of the pan with a spatula-
there should be a nice golden crust. 

3. Remove from heat, remove the lid, and drizzle 
saffron water over the rice. Cover immediately, and 
allow to cool 5 minutes. 
4. Remove the lid; invert carefully onto a serving 
plate. Serve warm, cut in wedges. 
jamaican rice and beans 

SERVES 8 

This island staple is also known as "Jamaican coat 
of arms." Some people add chiles to make it spicy, 
but we like it mild and slightly sweet to complement 
the heat of jerk chicken. For this dish, there's 
no need to soak the kidney beans before cooking. 

3/4 cup dried red kidney beans, rinsed and 
drained 
2 large garlic cloves, crushed with the flat 
side of a large knife 


11/4 cups unsweetened coconut milk 
21/2 cups long-grain rice 

3 scallions, finely chopped 
11/2 teaspoons finely chopped fresh thyme 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1. Bring the beans, garlic, coconut milk, and 2 cups 
water to a boil in a medium saucepan. Reduce heat 
to low. Cover, and cook until the beans are tender 
but not mushy, 1 hour and 50 minutes to 2 hours. 
2. Stir in 21/2 cups water and the rice, scallions, 
thyme, and 1 tablespoon salt; season with pepper. 
Bring to a boil. Stir once, then reduce heat to low. 
Cook, covered, without stirring, until all the liquid 
has been absorbed, about 20 minutes. Let stand, 
covered, 15 minutes. Fluff the mixture with a fork, 
and season with salt and pepper. 
238 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


yellow rice pilaf 

SERVES 4 

Coarse salt 

11/2 cups long-grain rice 
2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
1 onion, cut into   dice 
1 carrot, cut into   dice 
1 cup frozen peas, thawed and drained 
1 teaspoon ground turmeric 

1/2 teaspoon ground cumin 
1/4 teaspoon ground paprika 
Freshly ground pepper 


1. Fill a medium saucepan with water, and bring to 
a boil; add salt and the rice. Cook until the rice is 
just tender, 15 to 20 minutes. Drain, and transfer the 
rice to a serving bowl. 
2. Meanwhile, heat the oil in a large skillet over 
medium-high heat. Add the onion, and cook, stirring, 
until it begins to soften, about 4 minutes. Add 
the carrot; cook, stirring, until the vegetables are 
tender, about 5 minutes. Stir in the peas, turmeric, 
cumin, and paprika; cook until heated through. 
Transfer the mixture to the bowl with the rice, and 
stir to combine. Season with salt and pepper. Serve 
warm or at room temperature. 
Cooking rice on the stove is easy, 
as long as you keep these tips in 
mind: To trap the steam, leave 
the lid on as much as possible 
while cooking; let the rice sit 
afterward to absorb the water 
completely; and always fluff it 
with a fork just before serving. 

It also helps to have a basic 
understanding about the 
different types of rice. Most rice 
is classified as either white or 
brown; the color is determined 
by the way that the grain is 
processed. White rice is 
stripped of its husk, bran, and 
germ. Brown rice has the bran 
and germ intact, and takes 
longer to cook. In general, the 
shorter the grain, the more 
starch it contains. Some types of 
rice, especially Asian varieties 
such as basmati and jasmine, 
benefit from rinsing to remove 
the excess starch and any 
impurities. American enriched 
rices, however, have been coated 
with vitamins, and rinsing will 
only serve to wash those away. 
If you do rinse the rice (either 
under running water or by 
submerging it in cold water and 

PERFECT RICE 

then draining it), reduce the 
amount of water you cook with 
by 1/4 cup. 

Finally, although many recipes 
call for cooking 1 cup rice with 
2 cups water, try reducing the 
water to 11/2 cups; this ratio 
produces lighter, fluffier results. 

To cook rice on the stove: 

1. Bring the water to a boil in an 
uncovered pan over medium-
high heat; add a pinch of salt 
and the rice, then stir once 
and return to a boil. As soon as 
it boils, reduce the heat to 
low; cover, and set the timer to 
15 minutes for white rice and 
30 for brown. 
2. Leave the lid on throughout 
the cooking process; if you lift it, 
return it quickly. Toward the end 
of the cooking time, check the 
rice. You'll know it's done when 
there are craters in the surface 
that aren't full of water. 
3. Let the rice sit before serving, 
covered but removed from heat, 
5 to 10 minutes for white and 15 
for brown. Fluff with a fork 
before serving. 
If you cook rice often, you may 
want to invest in a rice cooker. 
These handy machines are 
nearly foolproof if you follow the 
manufacturer's instructions. 
(Note: If your machine was 
made in Asia, the instructions 
may assume the rice has been 
rinsed and therefore underestimate 
the amount of water 
needed; if you don't rinse, use 
the 11/2 cups water to 1 cup rice 
ratio). Rice cookers will also 
hold cooked rice at the perfect 
temperature for hours. Here is 
the basic process: 

1. Put the rice in the cooker and 
add a pinch of salt and the 
water; secure the top and press 
the start button. The machine 
will automatically adjust 
the cooking time for white or 
brown rice. 
2. When the cooker stops, the 
rice is ready to eat; there is no 
need to let the rice sit before 
serving. When dishing out the 
rice, use a wooden or plastic 
spoon to avoid scratching the 
nonstick canister. 
PASTA, RICE, AND GRAINS 239 


thai fried rice 

SERVES 1 

This recipe is a good way to use any leftover rice 
you might have; it can easily be doubled. 

2 tablespoons peanut oil 

4 to 8 garlic cloves, very finely chopped 
(more if not using optional ingredients) 


1 to 2 ounces thinly sliced boneless pork 
(optional) 


2 cups cold cooked rice (preferably 
Thai jasmine) 


1 cup torn Asian greens (such as cabbage, 
bok choy, or mustard greens) 


2 teaspoons Thai fish sauce, or to taste 

for garnish and accompaniments 

1/4 cup fresh cilantro leaves 

6 thin cucumber slices 

1 small scallion, trimmed (optional) 

2 lime wedges 

1/4 cup Thai Fish Sauce with Hot Chiles 
(recipe follows) 


1. Heat a large, heavy wok over high heat. When it 
is hot, add the oil, and heat until very hot. Add the 
garlic, and stir-fry until just golden, about 20 seconds. 
Add the pork, if using, and cook, stirring 
constantly, until all the pork has changed color 
completely, about 1 minute. 
2. Add the rice, breaking it up with wet fingers as 
you toss it into the wok. With a spatula, keep moving 
the rice around the wok. Keep scooping and 
tossing it. Occasionally press the rice against the 
wok with the back of a spatula, and soon it will become 
more manageable; good fried rice has a faint 
seared-in-the-wok taste. Cook for about 30 seconds. 
Add the greens, and then the fish sauce, and stir-
fry for 30 seconds to 1 minute. 
3. Turn out onto a dinner plate, and garnish with 
the coriander, cucumber slices, scallion, if using, 
and lime wedges. Squeeze the lime onto the rice as 
you eat it, along with the chile sauce. The salty, hot 
taste of the sauce brings out the full flavor of the rice. 
thai fish sauce with hot chiles 

MAKES ABOUT 1 CUP 

1/2 cup Thai bird chiles, stems removed 

1 cup Thai fish sauce 

1. In the bowl of a food processor fitted with the 
metal blade, pulse the chiles to chop them finely 
(stop before they become mushy). Or, wearing rubber 
gloves to protect your hands, use a cleaver or a 
sharp knife to mince the chiles on a cutting board. 
2. Transfer the minced chiles (with their seeds) to 
a glass or plastic container, and add the fish sauce. 
Cover, and store in refrigerator. The sauce will keep 
indefinitely, losing the chiles' heat over time; top 
with extra chiles or fish sauce. Serve in small individual 
condiment bowls. 
green rice 

SERVES 6 TO 8 

2 tablespoons vegetable or olive oil 

1 white onion, cut into   dice 

2 garlic cloves, minced 

11/2 cups long-grain rice 

21/2 cups homemade or low-sodium store-
bought chicken or vegetable stock, or 
water 

1/2 cup finely chopped fresh cilantro 

1 poblano chile, seeded and finely chopped 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1. Heat the oil in a large saucepan over medium 
heat. Add the onion; cook until it is soft and translucent, 
about 8 minutes. Add the garlic; cook 2 minutes. 
Add the rice, and stir to coat. Add the stock, 
and bring to a boil; reduce heat to a simmer. Cover, 
and cook until the rice is tender, about 15 minutes. 
2. Turn off heat; let stand, covered, until the liquid 
is absorbed, 5 to 10 minutes. Fluff with a fork; stir 
in the cilantro and poblano. Season with salt and 
pepper. Serve hot. 
240 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


coconut almond rice 

SERVES 6 

We serve this creamy rice dish with grilled skewered 
shrimp and a spicy lime dipping sauce. 

1 stalk fresh lemongrass, outer leaves 
peeled,  -long piece cut from root 
end and sliced in half lengthwise 


2 cups unsweetened coconut milk 

1 cup water 
2 to 4 fresh or frozen kaffir lime leaves 


2 teaspoons coarse salt 
11/2 cups long-grain rice 

1/4 cup slivered almonds, toasted 

1/2 cup lightly packed fresh cilantro leaves, 
coarsely chopped, plus several sprigs for 
garnish 


Freshly ground pepper 

1. In a medium saucepan, combine the lemongrass, 
13/4 cups coconut milk and the water, kaffir lime 
leaves, and salt. Heat over medium-high heat until 
the milk just begins to simmer. Stir in the rice, and 
reduce heat to a simmer. Cover; cook until the rice 
is tender, 20 to 25 minutes. 
2. Stir in the nuts, cilantro, and remaining 1/4 cup 
coconut milk; season with pepper. Discard the 
lemongrass. Serve immediately, garnished with 
cilantro sprigs. 
three-grain pilaf 

SERVES 8 

2 tablespoons unsalted butter 
1 small onion, finely chopped 


11/2 cups jasmine rice, rinsed 
1/2 cup red rice, rinsed 

1 cup quinoa, rinsed 

3/4 teaspoon coarse salt 
Melt butter in a medium saucepan over medium 
heat. Add onion; cook, stirring occasionally, until 
onion is soft and pale gold, 8 to 10 minutes. Stir in 
4 cups water, the grains, and salt. Raise heat to high; 
bring to a boil. Reduce heat to low, and stir. Cover, 

and cook until grains are tender, 20 to 25 minutes. 
Remove from heat, and let stand, covered, 10 minutes. 
Fluff with a fork, and serve. 

lemon risotto with 
asparagus and peas 

SERVES 4 AS A MAIN COURSE 

OR 6 AS AN APPETIZER 

If you would prefer a simple lemon risotto, omit 
the asparagus and peas. 

6 cups homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock 


4 tablespoons unsalted butter 
1 small onion, finely chopped 


1 cup Arborio rice 
1/2 cup dry white wine 


6 thin asparagus spears, trimmed and cut 
into   lengths 


1 cup thawed frozen peas 

1 teaspoon finely grated lemon zest, plus 2 
tablespoons fresh lemon juice 


1 cup chopped fresh flat-leaf parsley 

1/2 cup finely grated Parmigiano-Reggiano 
cheese, plus more for serving 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1. Bring the stock to a boil in a medium saucepan; 
turn off heat. 
2. Melt 2 tablespoons butter over medium heat in 
another medium saucepan. Add the onion; cook, 
stirring constantly, until translucent, 6 to 7 minutes. 
Add the rice; cook, stirring constantly, until the edges 
of the grains are translucent, 2 to 3 minutes. Raise 
heat to medium-high. Add the wine; cook, stirring 
constantly, until the wine has completely evaporated. 
3. Add 1/2 cup stock; cook, stirring constantly, until 
the stock has been completely absorbed and a 
wooden spoon drawn through the rice leaves a trail 
in its wake. Continue adding about 4 more cups 
stock, 1/2 cup at a time, waiting for each addition to 
be absorbed before adding the next. (It should take 
about 13 minutes.) 
PASTA, RICE, AND GRAINS 241 


4. Stir in the asparagus. Add 1/2 to 1 cup more stock, 
in same manner as described above. About 1 minute 
before the risotto is done, stir in the peas. The risotto 
is done when the liquid looks creamy and the grains 
are cooked but still slightly firm in centers. (The total 
cooking time will be 16 to 20 minutes.) 
5. Remove from heat; stir in 1/2 cup stock. (You may 
have stock left over.) Stir in the zest, juice, remaining 
2 tablespoons butter, parsley, and cheese. Season 
with salt and pepper. Serve with more cheese. 
MAKING RISOTTO WITH BROWN 
RICE OR FARRO 


The key here is presoaking the grains: Cover 
1 cup brown rice or farro with cold water by 2 
to 3 inches in a medium saucepan. Bring to a 
boil; boil 1 minute. Turn off heat; let stand 
1 hour. Drain. Follow Lemon Risotto with Asparagus 
and Peas (page 241). Cooking time 
will be about 22 minutes, so add the asparagus 
after 18 minutes. 

yellow pepper risotto 
with shrimp and zucchini 

SERVES 8 TO 10 AS A MAIN DISH; 10 TO 12 

AS A STARTER 

This recipe was developed by Christopher Israel, 
formerly the chef and a co-owner at one of Bruce 
Carey's restaurants. 

4 yellow bell peppers 

6 tablespoons olive oil 

2 pounds medium shrimp, peeled and 
deveined, tails intact, shells rinsed and 
reserved 


1 teaspoon coarse salt, plus more for 
seasoning 


Freshly ground black pepper, for 

seasoning 

10 tablespoons unsalted butter 

2 large zucchini, chopped into   
pieces 


3 quarts homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock 


6 shallots, minced 
2 cups Arborio or Carnaroli rice 


1 cup dry white wine 

1/2 cup loosely packed fresh basil, finely 
chopped, plus more for garnish (optional) 


1. Place the bell peppers directly on a gas-stove 
burner over high heat, turning with tongs as soon 
as each side is blistered and blackened. (Alternatively, 
roast the peppers under the broiler.) Transfer 
to a bowl; cover with plastic wrap. Let stand until 
cool enough to handle. Peel the peppers, discarding 
the skins; cut in half, and discard the seeds and 
ribs. Transfer the peppers to the bowl of a food 
processor fitted with the metal blade. Puree until 
smooth; set aside. 
2. Heat 2 tablespoons oil in a large skillet over 
medium heat. In a large bowl, toss the shrimp with 
3/4 teaspoon salt, and season with black pepper. 
Arrange one-third of the shrimp in a single layer in 
skillet. Cook until they are opaque and cooked 
through, 3 to 4 minutes, turning once. Transfer to 
a plate; repeat with the remaining oil and shrimp, 
wiping out the skillet with paper towels between 
batches, as needed. Set aside, and cover loosely with 
foil to keep warm. 
3. In the same skillet, melt 2 tablespoons butter over 
medium heat. Add the zucchini and remaining 1/4 
teaspoon salt, and season with pepper. Cook until 
the zucchini is just tender and bright green, 3 to 4 
minutes. Remove from heat; set aside. 
4. Place the stock in a large saucepan over medium 
heat. Add the shrimp shells, and bring to a boil. Remove 
from heat, and strain through a fine sieve, discarding 
the shells. Return the stock to the pan, and 
bring back to a boil; keep at a low simmer. 
5. Meanwhile, melt 6 tablespoons butter in a large 
heavy-bottomed saucepan over medium heat. Add 
the shallots, and cook, stirring constantly, until they 
are soft and translucent, about 4 minutes. Add the 
rice; cook, stirring constantly, until the grains are 
glossy and make a sound like glass beads clicking, 
3 to 4 minutes. 
242 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


6. Add the wine to the rice mixture. Cook, stirring 
constantly, until the wine is completely absorbed 
by the rice. 
7. Using a ladle, add about 3/4 cup hot stock to the 
rice along with a few tablespoons reserved pepper 
puree. Stir constantly with a wooden spoon at moderate 
speed until the mixture is just thick enough 
to leave a clear wake behind the spoon; be careful 
not to stir too vigorously, or the mixture may become 
gluey. 
8. Continue adding hot stock, 3/4 cup at a time, along 
with some puree, stirring constantly, until the rice 
is mostly translucent but still opaque in the center, 
a total of 18 to 25 minutes. You may not need 
to use all of the stock and can add smaller amounts 
as you go along. The final mixture should be thick 
enough to suspend the rice in liquid that is the consistency 
of heavy cream. 
9. Remove from heat, and stir in the reserved 
shrimp and zucchini, remaining 2 tablespoons 
butter, and the basil. Season with salt and black 
pepper, and garnish with basil, if desired. Serve 
immediately. 
risotto with peas, 
marjoram, and asiago 

SERVES 4 

Perfect risotto is easy to make; the keys are to be 
sure the stock is fully incorporated after each addition 
and to avoid overcooking the rice. If you 
prefer, you may use Parmesan instead of Asiago 
cheese in this recipe. 

6 to 8 cups homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock 


3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

2 shallots, minced 
1 cup Arborio or Carnaroli rice 


1/2 cup dry white wine 
11/2 pounds garden peas, shelled (11/2 cups) 

3 tablespoons unsalted butter 

1 cup grated Asiago cheese 
(about 4 ounces) 


1 tablespoon coarsely chopped 
fresh marjoram leaves, plus several 
sprigs for garnish 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1. Bring the stock to a boil in a medium saucepan 
over medium heat; reduce heat, and keep at a low 
simmer. 
2. Meanwhile, heat the oil in a large, heavy-
bottomed saucepan over medium heat. Add the 
shallots, and cook, stirring frequently, until they are 
softened and translucent, about 4 minutes. Add the 
rice; cook, stirring frequently, until it is thoroughly 
coated and slightly fragrant, 3 to 4 minutes. Add 
the wine, and cook, stirring constantly, until it is 
completely absorbed. 
3. Using a ladle, add 3/4 cup hot stock to the rice mixture; 
stir constantly with a wooden spoon until it 
is thick enough to leave a clear wake. 
4. Continue adding stock, 3/4 cup at time, stirring 
constantly after each addition, until the rice is 
mostly translucent but still opaque in the center 
and the liquid is the consistency of heavy cream, a 
total of 18 to 20 minutes; the mixture will continue 
to thicken slightly when removed from heat. About 
12 minutes into cooking, stir in the peas. Watch 
carefully, adding smaller amounts of liquid if necessary 
to make sure it does not overcook. The rice 
should be al dente but no longer crunchy, and the 
peas tender and bright green. 
5. Remove from heat. Stir in the butter, cheese, and 
chopped marjoram; season with salt and pepper. 
Serve garnished with marjoram sprigs. 
PASTA, RICE, AND GRAINS 243 


arugula risotto 

SERVES 12 

Because this recipe makes a large quantity of 
risotto, be sure to use a wide, shallow saucepan or 
skillet to let the rice cook evenly. 

3 to 31/2 quarts (12 to 14 cups) homemade 
or low-sodium canned (6 141/2-ounce cans) 
chicken stock 

1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil 

8 shallots, minced 
3 cups Arborio or Carnaroli rice 


11/2 cups dry white wine 
1/2 cup (1 stick) unsalted butter 

11/2 cups freshly grated Parmigiano-Reggiano 
cheese, plus more for serving 

1/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons Arugula Puree 
(recipe follows) 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

Arugula flowers, for garnish (optional) 

1. Bring the chicken stock to a simmer in a large 
stockpot over medium heat; cover, and keep at a 
steady simmer until ready to use. At the same time, 
heat the oil in a large, heavy-bottomed saucepan 
over medium heat. Add the shallots to the oil; cook, 
stirring occasionally, until the shallots are softened 
and translucent, about 10 minutes. Add the rice, and 
cook, stirring constantly, until the rice is thoroughly 
coated and makes a clicking noise, 3 to 4 minutes. 
Add the wine; cook, stirring constantly, until the 
wine is completely absorbed. 
2. Using a ladle, add about 11/2 cups hot stock to the 
rice; cook, stirring constantly with a wooden spoon, 
until most of the liquid has been absorbed and the 
mixture is just thick enough to leave a clear trail 
behind the spoon. Add another 3/4 cup hot stock to 
rice; cook, stirring constantly, until most of liquid 
is absorbed. 
3. Continue adding stock, 3/4 cup at a time, stirring 
constantly after each addition, until the rice is 
mostly translucent but still opaque in the center, 
and the liquid is the consistency of heavy cream, 
20 to 25 minutes. The rice should be al dente but 
no longer crunchy. Watch carefully, and gradually 
reduce the amount of added liquid to make sure the 
mixture does not overcook; it will continue to 
thicken after it is removed from heat. 

4. Remove from heat. Stir in the butter, cheese, and 
arugula puree; season with salt and pepper. To 
serve, mound risotto in the center of shallow serving 
bowls, and sprinkle with additional cheese. Garnish 
with arugula flowers, if desired. 
arugula puree 

MAKES 1/2 CUP 

This verdant puree can be tossed with pasta or 
drizzled over boiled potatoes just like pesto. 
It can be stored in an airtight container for up 
to 5 days in the refrigerator. 

23/4 teaspoons coarse salt 
1 bunch arugula (about 31/2 ounces), 
stems removed 
1/3 cup extra-virgin olive oil 

1/8 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 

1. Prepare an ice-water bath; set aside. Bring a 
medium saucepan of water to a boil, and add 21/2 
teaspoons salt and the arugula. As soon as the water 
returns to a boil, remove from heat. Using a slotted 
spoon, transfer the arugula to the ice bath to 
stop the cooking. Working in batches, remove the 
arugula from the ice bath and place on paper towels 
to drain, squeezing out as much excess water as 
possible. 
2. Transfer the arugula to the jar of a blender. Add 
the oil, remaining 1/4 teaspoon salt, and the pepper; 
puree until smooth and thickened with a small 
amount of unincorporated oil on the surface. Before 
using, stir gently to combine. 
244 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


farro salad with thinly 
sliced zucchini, pine nuts, 
and lemon zest 

SERVES 8 TO 10 

Farro is a type of hulled wheat that has been cultivated 
in Italy for centuries. Look for it at gourmet 
shops and health-food stores, where it is also sold 
as spelt. Other grains, such as barley or bulgur 
wheat, can also be used; cook them according to 
package instructions. 

3/4 pound farro 
Coarse salt 
1 small shallot, minced 


Grated zest and juice of 11/2 lemons 
3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 


1/2 cup pine nuts 
1 pound zucchini, ends trimmed 


1/2 cup loosely packed fresh flat-leaf 
parsley leaves, roughly chopped 


Freshly ground pepper 
4 ounces Parmigiano-Reggiano cheese 


1. Place the farro in a large saucepan, and add 
enough cold water to cover by about 3 inches. Bring 
to a boil over high heat; add salt, and stir once. Reduce 
heat to medium, and simmer until the farro 
is al dente, according to package instructions, 10 to 
12 minutes. Drain, and let cool. 
2. In a small bowl, combine the shallot with the 
lemon juice and salt; let stand 15 minutes. Meanwhile, 
in a small saute pan, heat the oil over medium 
heat, and add the pine nuts. Cook, stirring, until they 
are lightly toasted, about 5 minutes. Remove from 
heat, and add the lemon zest. 
3. Using a mandoline or sharp knife, slice the zucchini 
crosswise as thinly as possible; place in a large 
bowl. Add the farro, pine nut mixture, and parsley; 
stir to combine. Stir in shallot mixture; season with 
salt and pepper. Transfer to a large serving bowl. 
4. Using a vegetable peeler, shave half the cheese 
over the salad; toss to combine. The salad can be 
stored up 6 hours in refrigerator, covered with plastic 
wrap. Just before serving, shave the remaining 
cheese on top. 
crimson couscous 

SERVES 2 

To make this recipe in advance, dice the beet and 
prepare as directed in step 1, and refrigerate it in 
the liquid, covered, up to 1 day. 

1/2 cup peeled, diced (1/4 inch) beet 
(about 1 medium beet) 


1/2 teaspoon coarse salt, plus more 
for seasoning 


1/2 tablespoon unsalted butter 
1/8 teaspoon ground coriander 


1/8 teaspoon ground cumin 
1/2 cup couscous 


1/4 cup dried apricots, cut into   dice 
2 tablespoons dried currants 


1 teaspoon finely grated orange zest 
2 tablespoons fresh orange juice 


Freshly ground pepper 

1. Bring 3/4 cup water, the diced beet, and the salt 
to a boil in a medium saucepan. Reduce heat; simmer 
the beet, covered, until tender, about 15 minutes. 
Reserve 1/2 cup cooking liquid; drain the beet. 
(If you have less than 1/2 cup liquid, add water to fill.) 
2. Return the beet and liquid to the pan. Add the 
butter, coriander, and cumin; bring to a boil. Stir 
in the couscous; cover, and remove from heat. Let 
stand until liquid is absorbed, about 5 minutes. 
3. Fluff the couscous with a fork. Stir in the apricots, 
currants, zest, and orange juice. Season with salt 
and pepper. 
PASTA, RICE, AND GRAINS 245 


barley pilaf with pearl onions 

SERVES 8 

You can substitute frozen pearl onions for fresh, if 
you like, and skip step 1. 

10 ounces white pearl onions (about 2 cups) 

1 tablespoon chicken fat, margarine, 
or unsalted butter 


2 cups pearl barley 

1 quart homemade or low-sodium store-
bought chicken stock, plus more if needed 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1. Bring a large saucepan of water to a boil. Add the 
onions, and blanch until the skins loosen, about 1 
minute. Drain the onions in a colander, and rinse 
with cold water. Peel the onions, and set aside. 
2. Heat the fat in a large saucepan over medium-
low heat until hot but not smoking. Add the barley; 
cook, stirring frequently, until the barley is 
browned and fragrant, about 15 to 20 minutes. 
3. Add the stock and reserved onions. Bring to a 
boil, then reduce to a simmer. Season with salt and 
pepper. Cover, and cook the barley until it is tender 
but chewy and all the liquid has been absorbed, 
about 40 minutes; if all the liquid is absorbed and 
the barley is still not done, add a few tablespoons 
stock or water, and continue cooking. Serve hot. 
mixed-grain pilaf 

SERVES 12 

3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

2 tablespoons unsalted butter 
1 large onion, finely chopped (11/2 cups) 


2 garlic cloves, minced 

4 cups thinly sliced white mushrooms
(about 3/4 pound) 


3/4 cup thinly sliced cremini mushrooms 
(about 2 ounces) 
2 cups pearl barley 

1 cup hard wheat berries 
1 cup wild rice 


1/2 cup millet 

7 cups homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


1. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F. Heat oil and butter in a 
large ovenproof Dutch oven over medium heat. Add 
onion and garlic; cook, stirring occasionally, until 
softened, 6 to 8 minutes. Add mushrooms. Raise 
heat to medium-high, and cook, stirring occasionally, 
until mushrooms are softened, about 5 minutes. 
Stir in all of the grains. Cook, stirring often, 12 
minutes. Stir in stock; bring to a boil. 
2. Cover, and transfer to oven. Bake until grains are 
tender, 40 to 50 minutes (check after 40 minutes, 
but don't remove lid before then). Season with salt 
and pepper. Serve immediately. 
246 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


toasted couscous tabbouleh 

SERVES 4 

Toasting couscous in the pan before adding 
water imparts a nuttiness that complements the 
distinctive flavors of mint and parsley. 

1 medium red onion


2 cups water, plus more for soaking 

Nonstick cooking spray 
8 ounces Israeli couscous 


11/2 teaspoons coarse salt 

1/4 cup roughly chopped fresh flat-leaf 
parsley 


1/4 cup roughly chopped fresh mint leaves 
2 teaspoons extra-virgin olive oil 


2 teaspoons fresh lemon juice 
Lemon wedges, for garnish 


1. Place the red onion in a small bowl, and cover 
with water. Let soak 30 minutes; transfer to paper 
towels, and drain. 
2. Lightly coat a medium saucepan with cooking 
spray, and place over medium heat. Add the couscous; 
cook, stirring constantly, 1 minute. Add the 
water, and bring to a boil. Add 1 teaspoon salt; cook 
until all the water has been absorbed and the couscous 
is al dente, about 8 minutes. Remove from heat; 
let cool completely. 
3. In a large bowl, combine the couscous, reserved 
red onion, parsley, mint, oil, and lemon juice; toss 
to combine. Season with remaining 1/2 teaspoon salt. 
Serve, garnished with lemon wedges. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 253 CALORIES, 3 G FAT, 

0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 48 G CARBOHYDRATE, 718 MG SODIUM, 

8 G PROTEIN, 4 G FIBER 

wheatberries with vegetables 

SERVES 8 TO 10 AS A SIDE DISH 

This is an excellent accompaniment to meat or 
fish; it can also be served as an entree. 

1 cup wheatberries 

1 quart water 
1 small head broccoli (about 15 ounces), 
trimmed and cut into florets 
2 teaspoons olive oil 


1 medium yellow onion, peeled and diced 

2 garlic cloves, peeled and minced 

1 28-ounce can tomatoes, chopped 
1/4 cup chopped fresh oregano 


1 large yellow zucchini, quartered 
lengthwise and cut into   slices 


1/2 small eggplant, cut into   pieces 

1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 

1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 

1. Place the wheatberries in a small stockpot over 
high heat. Add the water. Cover; bring to a boil. Reduce 
heat to low. Simmer until tender, at least 40 
minutes. Drain; set aside. 
2. Fill a large bowl with ice and water; set aside. 
Bring a medium pot of water to a boil. Add the broccoli, 
and blanch until bright green, 1 to 2 minutes. 
Drain, and transfer to the ice bath, and set aside. 
3. Heat the olive oil in a large skillet over medium-
low heat. Add the onion and garlic, and cook, stirring 
frequently, until translucent, about 10 minutes. 
Raise heat to medium, and add the tomatoes, 
oregano, zucchini, eggplant, salt, and pepper; cook, 
stirring occasionally, until the vegetables have softened, 
about 15 minutes. Add the broccoli and wheat-
berries, and continue to cook until the broccoli and 
wheatberries are heated through, about 3 minutes 
more. Serve. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 64 CALORIES, 2 G FAT, 

0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 39 G CARBOHYDRATE, 260 MG 

SODIUM, 8 G PROTEIN, 9 G FIBER 

PASTA, RICE, AND GRAINS 247 


meat 



BEEF 


daube de boeuf provencal 

SERVES 6 

You can make this stew 1 day ahead to allow its 
flavors to mellow and mingle. 

4 sprigs fresh thyme 

1 dried bay leaf 

3 whole cloves 

1 teaspoon whole black peppercorns 

3 strips orange zest (2 to 3 inches each), 
plus 2 tablespoons fresh orange juice 


1 medium onion, coarsely chopped 
(about 1 cup) 


2 garlic cloves, crushed with the flat side 
of a large knife 


1 celery stalk, cut crosswise into   
pieces (about 1/2 cup) 


3 medium carrots, cut crosswise into   
pieces (about 11/4 cups) 


1 bottle (750 ml) rich red wine, such as 
Ctes de Provence, Ctes du Rhne, 
Syrah, or Shiraz 


4 pounds beef chuck roast


1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil 
1 tablespoon tomato paste 


1/2 cup homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought beef or chicken stock 


1/2 cup Nicoise olives, pitted and rinsed 
Coarse salt 


1. Make a bouquet garni: Put the thyme, bay leaf, 
cloves, peppercorns, and zest on a piece of cheesecloth; 
tie into a bundle. Combine the onion, garlic, 
celery, carrots, bouquet garni, and wine in a large 
nonreactive bowl. Add the beef, and toss to coat. 
Cover, and marinate in the refrigerator 12 to 24 
hours, stirring occasionally. 
2. Preheat the oven to 300 degrees F. Remove the beef from 
the wine mixture; pat dry with paper towels. Set 
aside. Transfer the wine mixture to a heavy pot, and 
bring to a boil. Reduce heat, and simmer 5 minutes. 
Set aside. 
3. Heat 2 tablespoons oil in a large skillet over 
medium-high heat. Cook half of the beef, turning, 
until deeply browned, about 2 minutes per side. 
Transfer to a plate. Repeat with the remaining oil 
and beef. 
4. Stir the tomato paste into the stock; add to the 
skillet, scraping up browned bits with a wooden 
spoon. Add to the wine mixture. Stir in the olives 
and beef. Season with salt. Bring to a simmer over 
medium-high heat. 
5. Cover the daube; transfer to the oven. Cook 2 
hours. Reduce oven temperature to 275 degrees  F if the 
daube starts to boil. After 2 hours, stir in the orange 
juice. Cook until the beef is very tender, about 30 
minutes more. 
grilled rib chops 
with mojo sauce 

SERVES 6 

Serve this dish with a platter of mixed garden 
tomatoes drizzled with olive oil and sprinkled 
with coarse salt. 

11/4 teaspoons whole cumin seeds 

1/4 cup minced garlic (about 6 cloves) 

1 fresh serrano chile, seeded and minced 
(about 1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon) 


Coarse salt 
1/2 cup olive oil 


3 tablespoons fresh orange juice, plus 
2 tablespoons finely grated orange zest 
(about 2 oranges) 


3 tablespoons fresh lime juice (2 to 3 limes) 
2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 


3/4 cup chopped fresh flat-leaf parsley 
Freshly ground pepper 
6 beef rib chop steaks (each about 
12 ounces and 1 inch thick) 


1. Make the mojo sauce: Toast the cumin seeds in 
a dry small skillet over high heat, swirling the pan 
occasionally, until fragrant, about 1 minute. Grind 
the cumin seeds, garlic, chile, and 11/2 teaspoons salt 
with a mortar and pestle until the mixture forms a 
coarse paste. Transfer to a small bowl. 
250 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


2. Heat the oil in a small saucepan over medium 
heat. Pour over the chile mixture. Let cool completely. 
Stir in the juices, orange zest, and parsley; 
season with pepper. The sauce can be refrigerated, 
covered, until ready to use, up to 2 days (bring to 
room temperature before serving). 
3. Heat the grill to medium (if using a charcoal grill, 
the coals are ready when you can hold your hand 5 
inches above grill for 5 to 6 seconds). Season the 
rib chops with salt and pepper. Grill, turning once, 
until cooked to desired doneness, 3 to 5 minutes 
per side for medium-rare. Serve with the mojo sauce. 
brisket with dried fruits 

SERVES 10 

3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

5 pounds beef brisket 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


4 medium onions, halved and thinly sliced 
4 garlic cloves, thinly sliced 


1 can (28 ounces) whole peeled plum 
tomatoes, coarsely chopped, with juice 


23/4 cups homemade or low-sodium store-
bought beef stock 

1/3 cup cider vinegar 

1 bag (141/2 ounces) prepared sauerkraut, 
drained 


1 cup pitted prunes 
1 cup dried Black Mission figs 


1 cup dried apricots 
1 cup pitted dates 


1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Heat the oil in a large 
roasting pan over high heat. Season the beef with 
salt and pepper. Brown the beef in the pan all over, 
about 4 minutes per side. Transfer to a platter. Add 
the onions and garlic to the pan; reduce heat to 
medium. Cook, stirring, until the onions just turn 
golden, about 5 minutes. Add the tomatoes and 
juice, the stock, and the vinegar; bring to a boil. 
2. Return the meat to the pan; cover with foil. Cook 
in the oven until fork tender, about 11/2 hours. Turn 
the meat; add the sauerkraut and dried fruits. Cover; 
cook until the meat is very tender and the sauce is 
reduced, about 11/2 hours. Let stand 30 minutes. Slice 
the meat against the grain. Serve with sauce. 
roast beef with 
horseradish sauce 

SERVES 4 

After the beef finishes cooking, let it stand at 
room temperature for at least 10 minutes before 
carving. Keep in mind it will continue to cook 
after it has been removed from the oven. 

1 top or bottom round beef roast (about 
2 pounds), tied 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

2 tablespoons vegetable oil 
6 small onions, halved lengthwise 


1 cup sour cream 
1/4 cup grated peeled fresh horseradish 
(or prepared horseradish) 
1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice 


1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Sprinkle the beef with 
1/2 teaspoon salt, and season with pepper. Heat the 
oil in a large ovenproof saute pan over high heat 
until hot but not smoking. Add the beef; brown on 
all sides, about 5 minutes total. Remove the pan 
from heat. 
2. Place the onion halves in the pan, cut sides down. 
Transfer the pan to the oven. Cook the beef and 
onions until an instant-read thermometer inserted 
into the center of the beef registers 140 degrees  F (for 
medium-rare), 35 to 40 minutes. Transfer the beef 
to a wire rack set over a rimmed baking sheet, and 
let stand 10 minutes before carving. Reserve the 
onions. 
3. Stir together the sour cream, horseradish, lemon 
juice, 1/4 teaspoon salt, and pepper to taste in a small 
bowl. Serve the beef with the horseradish sauce and 
roasted onions. 
MEAT 251 


knockwurst with 
braised cabbage and apples 


SERVES 6 

4 tablespoons unsalted butter 

2 medium onions, thinly sliced 

3 pounds green cabbage (about 1 head), 
cored and thinly sliced 


1 large, tart green apple, such as Granny 
Smith, peeled, cored, and chopped 


1 cup apple cider 

1/3 cup cider vinegar 
2 tablespoons packed light-brown sugar 


1 tablespoon coarse salt 

1 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 

9 knockwurst (about 2 pounds) 
Whole-grain mustard, for serving 


1. Melt the butter in a large, heavy-bottomed pot 
over medium-low heat. Add the onions; cook, stirring 
occasionally, until very soft and golden brown, 
about 18 minutes. 
2. Stir in the cabbage, apple, cider, vinegar, sugar, 
salt, and pepper. Cover; cook, stirring occasionally, 
until the cabbage is very soft, about 1 hour. 
3. Tuck the sausages into the cabbage; cover the 
pot. Cook until heated through, about 20 minutes. 
Serve with mustard. 
seared sirloin steak 
with olive relish 

SERVES 4 

1 tablespoon honey 

3 tablespoons sherry vinegar 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


1/4 cup olive oil, preferably Spanish, plus 
more for the skillet 


1/2 red onion, finely chopped (about 1/2 cup) 

1 tablespoon minced garlic (2 medium 
cloves) 


1/3 cup brine-cured pitted green olives, such 
as Picholine, cut into  -thick rounds 


1 navel orange, peel and pith cut off, flesh 
cut into   cubes 


1/4 cup coarsely chopped fresh flat-leaf 
parsley, plus sprigs for garnish 


1 boneless sirloin steak (11/2 pounds and 
1 inch thick) 

1. Whisk together the honey and vinegar in a 
medium bowl; season with salt and pepper. Whisking 
constantly, pour in the oil in a slow, steady 
stream; whisk until emulsified. Stir in the onion, 
garlic, olives, orange, and parsley; set aside. 
2. Season the steak all over with 1 teaspoon salt and 
1/2 teaspoon pepper. Coat a 1  seasoned cast-
iron skillet with a thin layer of oil; heat over 
medium-high heat until very hot. Sear the steak, 
turning once, 6 to 8 minutes per side for medium-
rare. Transfer to a plate, and tent with foil; let stand 
10 minutes before slicing. 
3. To serve, cut the steak against the grain into 1/4inch-
thick slices, and arrange on a platter. Spoon 
the relish on top; garnish with parsley sprigs. 
sauerbraten 

SERVES 10 TO 12 

You can refrigerate the sauerbraten, covered, for 
up to 2 days. (In fact, the flavors develop nicely 
when the dish is made ahead of time.) 

1 bottom round of beef (4 to 5 pounds) 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

4 tablespoons vegetable oil 

4 garlic cloves, coarsely chopped 

2 large onions, cut into thin slices 

2 dried bay leaves 

1/4 cup tomato paste 

1/4 cup ketchup 

1 cup red-wine vinegar 

2 cups dry red wine, such as Burgundy 

1/4 cup sour cream 

1. Season the beef with salt and pepper. Tie kitchen 
twine around the beef at   intervals and once 
from end to end. Heat 2 tablespoons oil in a large 
(8-quart), heavy-bottomed pot over medium heat 
until hot but not smoking. Brown the meat all over, 
including the ends, about 3 minutes per side; transfer 
to a plate. Keep the pot on the stove, and reduce 
heat to medium-low. 
2. Add the remaining 2 tablespoons oil and the garlic 
and onions to the pot. Cook, stirring often, until 
the onions are softened, 5 to 7 minutes. Add the bay 
leaves, tomato paste, ketchup, vinegar, and wine. 
Raise the heat to medium-high; bring the mixture 
to a boil. 
3. Return the beef to the pot; add 2 cups water. 
Cover the pot with a tight-fitting lid. Reduce heat 
to medium-low; simmer 2 hours. Turn the beef; continue 
to simmer until tender, 11/2 to 2 hours more. 
Let cool slightly. 
4. Transfer the beef to a cutting board. Remove the 
twine; let the beef stand 15 minutes. Skim the fat 
from the sauce. Bring the sauce to a simmer over 
medium heat; cook until the liquid is reduced by 
one-quarter, about 7 minutes. Season with salt and 
pepper. Remove from heat; whisk in the sour cream. 
5. Cut the beef across the grain into  -thick 
slices. Return the slices to the pot to immerse in 
sauce, then transfer to a large serving platter. Ladle 
more sauce on top. 
grilled marinated 
strip steak with scallions 


SERVES 4 

4 boneless strip steaks (about 10 ounces 
each) 


1 bunch scallions 
1/4 cup Worcestershire sauce 


1/4 cup soy sauce 
1 teaspoon dry mustard 


1 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 
1/2 teaspoon ground cumin 


Grated zest of 1 lemon 

Coarse salt 

1. Place the steaks in a large, shallow nonreactive 
dish. Slice 3 scallions into thin rounds, and combine 
with the remaining ingredients except the salt 
in a small bowl; whisk to combine. Pour the marinade 
over the steaks; cover with plastic wrap, and 
set aside at room temperature 40 minutes, turning 
the steaks once. 
MEAT 253 


2. Heat a grill or grill pan. Remove the steaks from 
the marinade, letting the excess drip off, and pat 
dry with paper towels. Season both sides generously 
with salt. Grill until they are well browned on 
the outside and cooked to desired doneness, or 
about 6 minutes on each side, for medium-rare. 
Transfer to a large serving platter; cover with foil, 
and let rest 10 minutes. Grill the remaining scallions, 
about 1 minute on each side, and serve with 
the steaks. 
korean barbecued ribs 
with pickled greens 

SERVES 4 TO 6 

Both the ribs and the greens need to marinate 
overnight, so plan accordingly. 

21/2 pounds flanken-style short ribs, cut 1/2 inch 
thick 

for the marinade 

4 garlic cloves, minced 

3 scallions, white and pale-green parts 
only, very finely chopped 


1/4 cup packed dark-brown sugar 
2 tablespoons granulated sugar 


Pinch of coarse salt 
1/4 cup fresh lime juice (2 to 3 limes) 


1/2 cup soy sauce 
1/3 cup mirin 


2 tablespoons toasted sesame oil 
3 tablespoons sesame seeds, toasted 


1 teaspoon Asian chili sauce or 1/2 teaspoon 
crushed red pepper flakes (optional) 

for the pickled greens 

1 pound Taiwan bok choy or napa cabbage, 
cut into   strips (8 cups) 

1 bunch scallions, white and pale-green 
parts only, cut into   pieces 


3 garlic cloves, halved lengthwise 

2 small dried hot red chiles 


2 teaspoons toasted sesame oil 

1 piece peeled fresh ginger (about 1 inch), 
cut into thin matchsticks 


1/4 cup rice-wine vinegar (not seasoned) 
1/4 cup mirin 


1 teaspoon coarse salt 
Vegetable oil, for brushing 


1. Cut each short rib crosswise into 3 pieces, cutting 
between the bones. Soak the ribs in a large bowl 
of ice-water for at least 20 minutes, or up to 2 hours. 
2. Make the marinade: Stir together the marinade 
ingredients in a medium bowl until the sugar is dissolved. 
Drain the ribs; pat dry. Put the ribs and marinade 
in a 9 x 1  glass baking dish; turn each 
rib to coat. Cover, and refrigerate overnight. 
3. Make the pickled greens: Put the greens and scallions 
in a medium bowl, and set aside. Cook the garlic 
and chiles in the sesame oil in a small saucepan 
over medium heat until the garlic is pale golden, 2 
to 3 minutes. Add the ginger, and cook, stirring, 
until fragrant, about 2 minutes. 
4. Remove from heat; stir in the vinegar, mirin, and 
salt. Immediately pour the contents of the pan over 
the greens, and toss to coat. Let cool to room temperature. 
Cover with plastic wrap; refrigerate 
overnight. 
5. Preheat the broiler, with the rack about 6 inches 
from the heat source. Line a rimmed baking sheet 
with foil, and very lightly brush with vegetable oil. 
Lift the ribs from the marinade, and arrange in a 
single layer on sheet (discard marinade). 
6. Broil the ribs (checking often) until well browned 
on top, about 5 minutes. Turn; continue to cook 
until well browned on other side, about 4 minutes 
more. Serve with chilled pickled greens. 
254 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


beef paillards 
with arugula and capers 


SERVES 6 

21/4 pounds beef tenderloin, cut 
into 12 3-ounce steaks 

Basic Marinade (page 647) 
1 small red onion, cut in paper-thin rounds 


3 tablespoons red-wine vinegar 
Coarse salt 


6 ounces baby arugula or chopped arugula 
2 ribs celery, very thinly sliced on the bias 


1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice 
1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil 


Freshly ground pepper 
1/4 cup capers, drained 


1. Cut open two sides of a resealable plastic bag. 
Place 1 steak in the bag; pound to   thickness 
with a meat pounder. Transfer to a nonmetal container. 
Repeat with the remaining steaks. Add the 
marinade. Chill 2 hours. 
2. Place the onion in a bowl with the red-wine vinegar 
and salt to taste; toss to combine. 
3. Heat a grill or grill pan. Place the arugula, celery, 
lemon juice, and olive oil in a medium bowl; toss to 
combine. Season with salt and pepper. Remove the 
meat from the marinade; season with salt and pepper. 
Grill for 1 minute on each side, until browned. 
To serve, place 2 pieces of beef on each plate; sprinkle 
with capers. Top with arugula salad and pickled 
onions, dividing evenly. 
filet mignon with 
herb-and-cheese potatoes 

SERVES 2 

3 tablespoons unsalted butter, softened 

3 tablespoons chopped fresh cilantro 
1/3 teaspoon minced garlic 


1/3 cup finely grated cotija cheese 
1/8 teaspoon cayenne pepper (or to taste) 


1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil 

2 russet potatoes (about 9 ounces each), 
peeled and cut lengthwise into  thick 
slices and again into  -wide 
strips, set aside in a bowl of cold water 


2 pieces filet mignon (7 ounces and 11/2 
inches thick each), room temperature 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
1 teaspoon vegetable oil 


1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Stir together butter, 1 
tablespoon cilantro, and 1/2 teaspoon garlic in a 
small bowl. Cover; refrigerate until ready to use. Stir 
together remaining 2 tablespoons cilantro and 1/2 
teaspoon garlic, the cheese, and cayenne in a 
medium bowl; set aside. 
2. Brush a rimmed baking sheet with the olive oil; 
set aside. Drain potatoes; pat dry. Add to bowl with 
cheese mixture; toss to coat. Arrange potatoes in 
a single layer on prepared baking sheet. Bake 20 
minutes; turn potatoes, and cook until golden, 
about 20 minutes more. 
3. Meanwhile, season both sides of beef with salt 
and pepper. Heat a medium skillet over high heat. 
Brush both sides of beef with vegetable oil; place 
in skillet. Reduce heat to medium-high. Cook beef 
7 minutes; turn, and cook until medium-rare, 7 to 8 
minutes more. Top each with cilantro butter; serve 
with potatoes. 
MEAT 255 


hanger steak with shallots 

SERVES 4 

1/2 cup extra-virgin olive oil 

1/4 cup sherry vinegar 

2 garlic cloves, crushed 

4 teaspoons Dijon mustard, plus more 
for serving 


1 tablespoon Worcestershire sauce 

11/2 pounds hanger steak 
5 medium shallots, halved or quartered 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1. Whisk together 1/4 cup oil, the vinegar, garlic, 
mustard, and Worcestershire sauce in a large glass 
dish. Place steak in dish; turn to coat with marinade. 
Let steak marinate, turning once, 20 minutes. 
2. Heat 2 tablespoons oil in a large skillet over 
medium-high heat. Add shallots; cook, stirring 
often, until just golden, 2 to 3 minutes. Reduce heat 
to medium-low. Season with salt. Cook, adding 1/4 
cup water in batches as needed to keep shallots 
from sticking, until tender and caramelized, 15 to 
18 minutes. Transfer shallots to a plate. 
3. Wipe out skillet. Heat 2 tablespoons oil over 
medium-high heat. Remove steak from marinade; 
pat dry. Season with salt and pepper. Cook steak, 
turning once, until an instant-read thermometer 
registers 140 degrees F (for medium-rare), 10 to 12 minutes 
per side. Tent with foil; let stand at room temperature 
10 minutes. Season with pepper. 
4. Meanwhile, wipe out skillet; reheat shallots over 
medium heat. Thinly slice steak. Serve with shallots 
and mustard. 
porterhouse 
with jalapeno butter 


SERVES 2 

Filet mignon can be prepared this way as well: 
Sear two 8-ounce steaks over direct heat for 3 
minutes per side; grill over indirect heat until 
medium-rare, 5 to 6 minutes more per side. 

1/2 cup (1 stick) unsalted butter, softened 

1 fresh jalapeno pepper, seeded and 
finely chopped 


1 garlic clove, minced 

1 porterhouse steak (21/2 pounds, 11/2 inches 
thick), room temperature 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1. Preheat a grill to medium-high (if you are using 
a charcoal grill, coals are ready when you can hold 
your hand 5 inches above grill for just 3 to 4 seconds). 
Stir butter, jalapeno, and garlic in a bowl; set aside. 
2. Season both sides of steak with salt and pepper. 
Grill over hotter part of grill, covered, flipping once, 
until browned, 3 to 4 minutes per side. Slide to 
cooler part of grill; grill, covered, flipping once, until 
medium-rare, 7 to 8 minutes more per side. Remove 
from grill, and let rest 10 minutes. Serve with 
jalapeno butter. 
grilled knockwurst 

SERVES 4 TO 6 

Grilled knockwurst goes well with yellow or 
Dijon mustard and soft pretzels. The knockwurst 
will char quickly on the grill; be sure to turn it 
frequently. 

6 knockwurst 

Mushrooms and Garlic Grilled in 

a Packet (recipe follows), for serving 

Preheat a grill to medium (if you are using a charcoal 
grill, coals are ready when you can hold your 
hand 5 inches above grill for just 5 to 6 seconds). 
Grill knockwurst, turning frequently, until marked 
by grill and heated through, about 5 minutes. Cut 
each knockwurst on the diagonal into   slices. 
Serve with grilled mushrooms and garlic. 

256 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


mushrooms and garlic 
grilled in a packet 

SERVES 4 TO 6 

Serve this packet hot off the grill, but be cautious 
when opening it. 

12 ounces cremini mushrooms, halved 
if large 


6 garlic cloves, peeled 

1/4 cup coarsely chopped fresh flat- 
leaf parsley 


1 tablespoon finely chopped fresh thyme 

3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


1. Preheat a grill to medium (if you are using a charcoal 
grill, coals are ready when you can hold your 
hand 5 inches above grill for just 5 to 6 seconds). 
Cut a piece of heavy-duty foil and a piece of parchment 
to 12 x 18 inches. Place foil on a work surface; 
lay parchment on top. Toss the mushrooms, garlic, 
parsley, thyme, and oil in a medium bowl; season 
with salt and pepper. Mound the mushroom mixture 
in the center of the parchment paper, allowing 
a   border all around. 
2. Hold the long sides of parchment and foil; bring 
together, and fold twice, creasing to seal firmly. Fold 
short ends twice, creasing to seal firmly. 
3. Grill packet until you hear mushrooms and liquid 
sizzling, 10 to 15 minutes. Flip packet, and grill 
until mushrooms are soft, about 15 minutes more. 
(Press lightly to test tenderness, or unfold center of 
packet to check, but be careful of steam escaping.) 
Remove packet; let stand 5 minutes before serving. 
beef tenderloin with 
mushrooms and thyme 

SERVES 10 TO 12 

1 beef tenderloin (4 to 5 pounds), tied 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil 


8 ounces shiitake mushrooms 
1 bunch fresh thyme sprigs 


Shallot-Brandy Sauce (recipe follows) 

1. Preheat the oven to 425 degrees F. Season beef with salt 
and pepper. Heat 2 tablespoons oil in a large skillet 
over medium-high heat. Add beef, and brown on 
all sides. 
2. Toss mushrooms with remaining 2 tablespoons 
oil in a bowl; season with salt and pepper. Add 
mushrooms and 3 thyme sprigs to skillet; place in 
oven. Cook until beef registers 125 degrees F for medium-
rare, 18 to 20 minutes. Let stand 20 minutes. Serve 
warm or at room temperature with mushrooms and 
shallot-brandy sauce. Garnish with thyme. 
shallot-brandy sauce 

MAKES ABOUT 2 CUPS 

3 tablespoons unsalted butter 

2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
1 cup finely chopped shallots 


1 tablespoon minced garlic 

3/4 cup brandy 
4 cups homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought beef stock 


1 cup heavy cream 
1/4 cup coarsely chopped fresh thyme 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

Heat butter and oil in a large skillet over medium 
heat. Add shallots and garlic; cook, stirring often, 
until soft, about 5 minutes. Remove from heat; add 
brandy. Bring to a boil. Cook until reduced by half. 
Whisk in stock and cream, and cook until thickened, 
about 10 minutes. Stir in thyme; season with 
salt and pepper. 

MEAT 257 


short ribs with root vegetables 

SERVES 8 

This recipe is inspired by ones that use flanken, a 
cut of beef from the chuck end of short ribs. In 
Jewish custom, the meat is boiled and served 
with horseradish. Our version uses braised boneless 
ribs and pairs them with earthy vegetables. 

6 pounds boneless beef short ribs, trimmed 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
1/4 cup olive oil 


3 large onions (9 ounces each), 
halved lengthwise and cut crosswise 
into   slices 


6 garlic cloves, finely chopped 
1/3 cup packed dark-brown sugar 


21/2 cups apple cider 
11/2 cups low-sodium store-bought chicken 
stock 
1 tablespoon fresh thyme leaves 

1 tablespoon finely chopped fresh rosemary 

1/3 cup finely chopped fresh flat-leaf 
parsley, plus more for garnish 


1 pound parsnips


13/4 pounds carrots, peeled and cut on 
the diagonal into   pieces 

11/2 pounds Yukon Gold potatoes, peeled 
and cut into   pieces 

1. Preheat the oven to 325 degrees F. Place a wire rack over 
a rimmed baking sheet; set aside. Season beef with 
salt and pepper. Heat oil in a 9-quart Dutch oven 
over high heat until hot but not smoking. Working 
in batches, cook the beef, flipping once, until 
browned, 2 to 3 minutes per side. Transfer beef to 
the wire rack. Reduce heat to medium-low. 
2. Add onions to pot; cook, stirring occasionally, 
until translucent, about 10 minutes. Raise heat to 
medium. Add garlic; cook 3 minutes, stirring occasionally. 
Stir in brown sugar, cider, stock, and 1/2 
cup water. Add thyme, rosemary, and parsley. Return 
beef to pot. Bring to a boil. Remove from heat. 
3. Cover; transfer to oven. Cook until almost fork-
tender, about 11/2 hours. 
4. Remove pot from oven. Stir in parsnips, carrots, 
and potatoes. Return to oven; cook until fork tender, 
1 hour 10 minutes more. Gently transfer beef 
and vegetables to a baking sheet or a plate. 
5. Skim fat from cooking liquid. Simmer over 
medium heat until reduced by about half, about 7 
minutes. Return beef and vegetables to pot. Season 
with salt and pepper; toss gently. Transfer to serving 
platter. Sprinkle with parsley. 
258 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


LAMB 


spice-crusted rack of lamb 

SERVES 2 

Rack of lamb is truly a special-occasion treat. 
Usually, you need to order it through a butcher, at 
the supermarket or in a butcher shop. Ask him to 
french the bones. He will know what you're talking 
about, and you will sound as if you do, too. 
This means removing excess meat and fat from 
the bones, which looks nice and makes the chops 
dainty and neat to eat. It is really important to let 
the meat rest for 10 minutes before serving (it 
will finish cooking and reabsorb juices). This 
time also lets you pull together the final elements 
of the meal. 

1 rack of lamb (8 ribs, about 11/4 pounds), 
frenched 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1/4 cup yellow mustard seeds 

2 teaspoons fennel seeds 

1 tablespoon olive oil 

Herb Oil (recipe follows), for serving 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees  F. Cut the rack into 2 
4-rib pieces, and season the meat generously with 
salt and pepper. 
2. Toast the mustard and fennel seeds in a large 
seasoned cast-iron (or ovenproof) skillet over 
medium heat, stirring constantly, until fragrant, 1 
to 2 minutes. Transfer to a plate to cool slightly. 
3. Heat the oil in the skillet until hot but not smoking. 
Place 1 piece of lamb in the skillet, bone side 
down, and brown all over, 1 to 2 minutes per side. 
Transfer to a plate; repeat with the remaining piece 
of lamb. Roll the meat in spices to coat (do not coat 
the cut sides on either end). 
4. Return the meat to the skillet; transfer to the oven. 
Roast the meat until an instant-read thermometer 
inserted into the center (avoiding the bones) registers 
135 degrees F, for medium-rare, 18 to 24 minutes. 
5. Remove the meat from the skillet, and let stand 
at least 10 minutes. Cut the meat into individual 
or double chops, and cross the bones, if desired. 
Serve with herb oil. 
herb oil 

MAKES ABOUT 1 CUP 

A tasty herb oil is a nice alternative to a heavy or 
complicated sauce. It's quick and easy to make, 
and it looks and tastes great. Herb oil can be refrigerated 
up to 2 days before using; bring to 
room temperature before serving. 

1 cup mint leaves 
1/2 cup flat-leaf parsley leaves 
1/2 cup extra-virgin olive oil 
1/4 teaspoon coarse salt 


1. Bring a small saucepan of water to a boil. Prepare 
an ice-water bath. Add the mint and parsley to the 
boiling water; cook 30 seconds. Drain, and plunge 
the herbs into ice-water bath immediately. 
2. Wrap the herbs in a paper towel; squeeze out as 
much liquid as possible. Puree the herbs with the 
oil in a blender until well blended, about 3 minutes. 
Stir in the salt. 
MEAT 259 


braised lamb shanks 
with tomato and fennel 

SERVES 4 

Serve with Polenta (page 377). 

4 11/2-pound lamb shanks, trimmed 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
1/2 cup all-purpose flour 


4 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
2 tablespoons unsalted butter 


2 medium onions, sliced 1/4 inch thick 

1 large leek, white and light-green 
parts only, washed well, sliced into   
half-moons 

4 garlic cloves, thinly sliced 

1 cup dry red wine 

2 cups homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock 


1 28-ounce can peeled whole plum 
tomatoes, drained 


2 tablespoons tomato paste 
1 tablespoon fresh thyme leaves 


2 dried bay leaves 
2 medium fennel bulbs, sliced 1/4 inch thick 


1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Season the lamb all 
over with salt and pepper. Place the flour in a shallow 
bowl. Dredge the lamb in the flour, turning to 
coat evenly; shake off excess. Heat the oil and butter 
in an 8-quart Dutch oven or skillet over medium 
heat. Working in two batches, cook until the shanks 
are well browned, about 5 minutes per side. Transfer 
the shanks to a large plate; drain off all but 2 tablespoons 
fat from the skillet. 
2. Place the skillet over medium heat; add the 
onions and leek, and saute until they are lightly 
browned, about 6 minutes. Add the garlic; cook 4 
minutes more. Add the red wine; deglaze the pan 
by scraping up any browned bits with a wooden 
spoon. Return the shanks to the skillet, and add the 
chicken stock, tomatoes, tomato paste, thyme, and 
bay leaves. Bring to a boil; cover, and place in oven. 
Braise 2 hours; add the fennel, and cook 30 minutes. 
3. Using a slotted spatula, transfer the shanks and 
vegetables to a large bowl. Cover; set aside. Using a 
ladle, skim the fat from the surface of the cooking 
liquid; cook over medium heat until the liquid is 
thickened, 5 to 7 minutes. Return the shanks and 
vegetables to the pan; cook until heated through. 
Remove from heat, and season with salt and pepper. 
LEG OF LAMB 101 

The term leg of lamb generally refers to the 
hind leg and hip of the animal. This cut can 
be pricy. Though the cost may make some 
home cooks wary, they needn't be intimidated: 
Leg of lamb is very straightforward to 
prepare. Furthermore, a few leg cuts are actually 
quite a bargain-for example, the foreleg, 
or shoulder, has more connective tissue 
and is fantastic in stews. 

Generally, the meat of the upper portion of 
the leg is more tender than that of the lower 
section and does well with dry heat methods, 
such as roasting, grilling, and sauteing. 
Meat from the relatively inexpensive shank 
(the leg below the knee joint) is full of connective 
tissue. Slow cooking at gentle heat in 
moist conditions, such as braising or stewing, 
breaks this tissue down into soft gelatin, 
making the meat meltingly tender and enriching 
the pot liquor. A butcher should be 
able to quickly butterfly a leg for you, removing 
its bones to leave a slab of meat that is 
ideal for broiling or grilling, or stuffing and 
rolling, then roasting. 

When buying lamb, look for meat that is firm 
and bright, pink to light red in color, with 
smooth, white fat rather than yellow. The cut 
surface of the bones should be red and moist. 
Avoid meat that is darker, slightly purplish, 
strong-smelling, or with bones that are white 
and dry (signs of an older animal). Most 
American lamb is largely grain-fed, making 
it slightly more tender and milder tasting 
than grass-fed imported lamb. 

260 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


mint and pistachio 
stuffed leg of lamb 

SERVES 6 TO 8 

Large cuts of meat are often stuffed after being 
boned. Here, fresh mint, pistachios, and lemon 
juice bring Middle Eastern flavors to lamb. 

2 cups fresh mint leaves 

2 cups fresh flat-leaf parsley leaves 
1 cup unsalted roasted pistachio nuts 


2 garlic cloves 
11/2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 

1/2 cup plus 1 tablespoon extra-virgin 
olive oil 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1 6- to 7-pound leg of lamb, trimmed of 
excess fat and butterflied (about 2 inches 
thick) 

1 cup homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Place the mint, parsley, 
pistachios, garlic, and lemon juice in the bowl 
of a food processor fitted with the metal blade. Pulse 
to combine. With the machine running, add 1/2 cup 
olive oil through the feed tube; process until 
smooth. Season with salt and pepper. 
2. Lay the lamb flat on a clean work surface. Spread 
the mint mixture evenly over the lamb, leaving a 
  border all around. Starting at the narrow end, 
roll the lamb into a tight log; tie well with kitchen 
twine, being sure to secure both ends. 
3. Heat the remaining tablespoon olive oil in a cast-
iron skillet over medium heat. Place the lamb in the 
pan, and cook until browned on all sides, 7 to 10 
minutes. Place in the oven; roast until a meat thermometer 
registers 140 degrees F when inserted in the center, 
about 1 hour 10 minutes. Transfer the lamb to 
a platter or cutting board, and let rest 15 minutes. 
4. Meanwhile, make the pan sauce: Pour off the fat 
from the skillet. Add the stock, and deglaze the pan 
by scraping up any browned bits with a wooden 
spoon. Simmer until the liquid is slightly thickened, 
about 5 minutes. Remove from heat, and serve with 
the stuffed lamb. 
 

MEAT 261 


roasted whole leg of lamb 
with fresh herb rub 

SERVES 8 

1 6- to 7-pound leg of lamb, trimmed 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
2 garlic cloves, thinly sliced 


2 tablespoons plus 2 teaspoons Dijon 
mustard 


2 tablespoons chopped fresh thyme, 
plus 1 bunch for pan and garnish 


1 tablespoon chopped fresh rosemary, 
plus 1 bunch for pan and garnish 


2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

2 onions, peeled and quartered 

4 carrots, peeled 

4 stalks celery 

6 new potatoes, halved if large 

2 tablespoons all-purpose flour 

2 tablespoons unsalted butter, softened 
1/2 cup dry red wine 


1 cup homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought beef stock 


1. Preheat the oven to 500 degrees F. Season the lamb with 
salt and pepper. Make   slits all over; place a 
sliver of garlic in each. Rub 2 tablespoons mustard 
over the lamb; coat evenly with the thyme and rosemary, 
patting gently. 
2. Rub the oil over the bottom of a roasting pan; 
cover with herb bunches. Place the lamb on top. 
Roast 20 minutes; reduce heat to 375 degrees F. Add the 
onions, carrots, celery, and potatoes; season with 
salt and pepper. Roast until a meat thermometer inserted 
near center, avoiding bone, reads 140 degrees  F, 
about 70 minutes. Transfer the lamb and vegetables 
to a platter; let rest 20 minutes. 
3. Meanwhile, make the sauce: Knead the flour and 
butter together. Pour off the fat; place the pan over 
medium heat. Add the wine; reduce by half. Add the 
remaining mustard and stock. Stir; reduce slightly. 
Strain into a saucepan; simmer. Add the butter mixture 
in small pieces, whisking constantly. Remove 
from heat; season with salt and pepper. Garnish 
with herbs. 
spice-rubbed lamb chops 

SERVES 2 

1 teaspoon dried thyme 
1/2 teaspoon ground cumin 
1/2 teaspoon ground coriander 
1/4 teaspoon paprika 
1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 


Freshly ground pepper 
2 lamb rib chops (about 51/2 ounces each) 
2 teaspoons extra-virgin olive oil 
1 ounce arugula (about 2 cups) 


1. Stir together the thyme, cumin, coriander, paprika, 
and salt in a small bowl; season with pepper. 
Put the lamb chops on a plate; rub each side with 
spice mixture. Let stand at least 10 minutes, or up 
to 1 hour. 
2. Heat 1 teaspoon oil in a medium heavy skillet 
over medium-high heat until very hot. Add the 
chops. Reduce heat to medium. Cook the chops, 
flipping halfway through, until deeply browned, 
about 10 minutes total for medium-rare. Transfer 
each chop to a serving plate. Divide the arugula between 
the plates; drizzle with the remaining teaspoon 
oil. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 175 CALORIES, 12 G FAT, 
48 MG CHOLESTEROL, 1 G CARBOHYDRATE, 330 MG SODIUM, 
15 G PROTEIN, 1 G FIBER 

262 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


northern indian 
lamb meatballs 

SERVES 4 

2 small garlic cloves 

1 piece (1 inch) peeled fresh ginger, sliced 
2 tablespoons vegetable oil 


1 large onion, finely chopped 
1/2 teaspoon ground turmeric 


3/4 teaspoon cayenne pepper 
2 tablespoons plus 1 teaspoon ground 
coriander 


1 can (8 ounces) plain tomato sauce 
1 dried bay leaf 


Coarse salt 
12 ounces ground lamb 


1 cup fine fresh bread crumbs 
1/3 cup finely chopped fresh cilantro 


1 large egg 
6 prunes, quartered 


1/2 teaspoon garam masala 
Pickled vegetables, for serving 


Indian flatbread, for serving 

1. Process the garlic, ginger, and 11/2 teaspoons water 
in a food processor until a chunky paste forms; 
set aside. 
2. Heat the oil in a medium saucepan over medium 
heat until hot but not smoking. Add the onion; cook, 
stirring, until translucent, about 3 minutes. Set aside 
one-quarter of the onion in a large bowl. 
3. Add 1 tablespoon garlic paste, 1/2 cup water, the 
turmeric, 1/2 teaspoon cayenne, and 2 tablespoons 
coriander to the onion in the skillet. Cook 3 minutes, 
stirring. Add the tomato sauce, 11/2 cups water, 
and the bay leaf. Season with salt. Bring to a boil. 
Reduce heat to medium-low; simmer. 
4. Mix the reserved onion, lamb, bread crumbs, 
cilantro, egg, 1 teaspoon each garlic paste and salt, 
and remaining teaspoon coriander and 1/4 teaspoon 
cayenne. Divide into 24 pieces; roll into balls. Stuff 
each meatball with a prune quarter; roll to enclose. 
5. Add the meatballs to the simmering sauce (add 
water if the meatballs are not covered by the sauce). 
Cook until the sauce has thickened, about 40 minutes. 
Stir in the garam masala. 
grilled lamb chops 
with lemon yogurt sauce 


SERVES 4 

Low-fat plain yogurt can be used instead. 

1 cup whole-milk plain yogurt 

1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice 

1/8 teaspoon paprika 

1/8 teaspoon ground cumin 

8 rib lamb chops 

11/2 teaspoons coarse salt 
1/2 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 
Mint sprigs for garnish (optional) 

1. Make the yogurt sauce: Combine the yogurt, 
lemon juice, paprika, and cumin in a small bowl, 
and set aside in the refrigerator. 
2. Make the chops: Heat the grill to medium. Sprinkle 
the chops with salt and pepper, and grill until 
cooked through, 5 to 6 minutes per side. Serve with 
the yogurt sauce and mint sprigs, if desired. 
MEAT 263 


individual lamb pies 

SERVES 4 

3 tablespoons vegetable oil 

1 pound lamb stew meat


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1 medium onion, finely chopped 
2 celery stalks, cut into   dice 


4 ounces white button mushrooms, 
cut into   pieces 


1 piece (1 inch) peeled fresh ginger, 
minced (about 1 tablespoon) 


1 tablespoon fresh thyme, coarsely chopped 

Pinch of ground cloves 

1 cup homemade or low-sodium 
store-bought lamb or beef stock 


1/2 cup dry red wine 
4 ounces pitted prunes, halved 


Short Pastry Crust (recipe follows) 

All-purpose flour, for work surface 

1 tablespoon heavy cream 

1 large egg yolk 

1. Heat 2 tablespoons oil in a medium heavy pot 
over medium-high heat. Season the lamb with salt 
and pepper. Cook the lamb until browned on all 
sides, about 8 minutes. Transfer to a medium bowl. 
Add the remaining tablespoon oil to the pot. Add 
the onion, celery, and mushrooms; cook, stirring occasionally, 
until the vegetables are softened, about 
6 minutes. Stir in the ginger, thyme, cloves, lamb, 
stock, wine, and 1/2 cup water. Bring to a simmer; 
cover, and reduce heat to medium-low. Gently simmer 
until the lamb is tender, about 21/2 hours. Stir 
in the prunes. Season with salt and pepper. Let cool 
completely. 
2. Divide the dough in half. Wrap half in plastic; refrigerate 
until ready to use. Roll out other dough 
half on a lightly floured surface to a   thickness. 
Cut out 4 6-inch rounds. Transfer 1 round to 
each of 4   pie plates. Divide the stew among 
the pies. Roll out the remaining dough to a   
thickness. Cut out 4 7-inch rounds. Randomly 
punch out circles from the rounds with a   
round pastry tip (such as Ateco #806). Cover each 
pie with a round. Tuck the edges under; press gently 
to seal. Refrigerate until cold, about 30 minutes. 

3. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Whisk the cream and 
egg yolk in a small bowl. Brush the crusts with egg 
wash. Bake the pies on a rimmed baking sheet until 
crusts are golden brown and juices are bubbling, 
about 30 minutes. Transfer to a wire rack to cool 
slightly, about 15 minutes. 
short pastry crust 

MAKES ENOUGH FOR 
FOUR   DOUBLE-CRUST PIES OR 
ONE 13 x 4  DOUBLE-CRUST PIE 


21/2 cups all-purpose flour 

1 teaspoon salt 

6 tablespoons cold unsalted butter 

2 tablespoons cold vegetable shortening 

1/4 to 1/2 cup ice water 

Pulse the flour, salt, butter, and shortening in a food 
processor until the mixture resembles coarse meal. 
With the processor running, drizzle in 1/4 cup water 
until the dough just comes together. (If the dough 
is still crumbly, add up to 1/4 cup more ice water, 1 
tablespoon at a time.) Do not process for more than 
20 seconds. Divide the dough in half; wrap each in 
plastic. Refrigerate until cold, about 30 minutes. 

264 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


curried lamb kabobs with 
cherry tomatoes and red onions 

MAKES 8 

1 garlic clove, minced 

1/2 teaspoon turmeric 
1 teaspoon ground coriander 


1 teaspoon ground cumin 
1/2 teaspoon dried oregano 


6 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice 


1/4 cup loosely packed mint leaves, chopped 

2 pounds lamb shoulder


1 pound cherry tomatoes, mixed colors 
4 small red onions, cut into 8 wedges 


11/2 tablespoons coarse salt 
2 teaspoons freshly ground pepper 

1. Whisk together the garlic, turmeric, coriander, 
cumin, oregano, 4 tablespoons olive oil, lemon juice, 
and mint in a small bowl. Add the lamb. Toss to 
coat; refrigerate, covered, for at least 2 hours or 
overnight. 
2. Thread 4 cubes of lamb, alternating with tomatoes 
and onion, on each of 8 skewers. Brush with 
some of the remaining olive oil. Season with salt 
and pepper. 
3. Arrange the skewers, off direct heat, on a 
medium-hot grill. Grill, rotating the skewers and 
brushing with olive oil as necessary to prevent 
sticking, until the lamb is cooked through but pink 
inside, about 8 minutes, depending on the heat of 
the grill. The vegetables should be soft. 
PORK 


pork chops with herb stuffing 

SERVES 4 

1 cup cubed (3/8 inch) rustic bread 
without crusts 


1 tablespoon unsalted butter 

1/4 cup olive oil 

1/2 cup finely chopped onion 

3/4 cup finely chopped celery 
1/4 cup plus 1 tablespoon mixed chopped 
parsley and thyme 


21/4 teaspoons ground coriander 
1/2 cup plus 3 tablespoons chicken stock 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
4 bone-in pork chops (9 ounces each), 
cut horizontally to the bone 
2 garlic cloves, minced 


1/4 cup dry sherry 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Toast the bread cubes 
on a baking sheet until golden, about 7 minutes. 
Heat the butter and 1 tablespoon oil in a 1  
ovenproof skillet over medium heat. Cook the 
onion, stirring, until soft, about 3 minutes. Add the 
celery; cook 1 minute. Transfer to a bowl. Reserve 
the skillet. Toss the bread, herbs, 1/4 teaspoon coriander, 
and 3 tablespoons stock with the onion 
mixture. Season with salt and pepper. 
2. Stuff the chops. Using a fork, mix and mash the 
garlic, 2 teaspoons coriander, 1/2 teaspoon salt, and 
1 tablespoon oil; rub onto the pork. Heat 2 tablespoons 
oil in the skillet over medium-high heat. 
Cook the pork until golden brown, 2 to 3 minutes; 
flip, and transfer the skillet to the oven. Cook until 
the pork registers 155 degrees F, about 15 minutes. Transfer 
to a plate; cover. 
3. Add the sherry and 1/2 cup stock to the skillet. 
Cook over medium-high heat, stirring, until reduced 
by half. Serve with pork. 
MEAT 265 


molasses-glazed 
grilled pork loin 

SERVES 8 TO 10 

Leave a cool spot on the grill for cooking the 
roasts after they are glazed; turn them frequently 
to avoid burning. 

1 12-ounce jar unsulphured molasses 

1/4 cup grainy mustard 
2 teaspoons dry mustard 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

2 boneless pork loin roasts (3 to 4 pounds 
each) 


1. Heat a charcoal or gas grill. In a small bowl, whisk 
together the molasses, grainy mustard, and dry 
mustard, and season with salt and pepper. Set aside. 
2. Tie each pork loin with kitchen twine in four to 
five places to form a nice, round shape. Season liberally 
with salt and pepper. Sear until well browned 
on all sides, 15 to 20 minutes total. 
3. Brush with the glaze, and cook, turning and basting 
frequently, 5 minutes. Move to the cooler part 
of the grill, and close the lid. Continue cooking, 
basting and turning occasionally, until an instant-
read thermometer registers 160 degrees F, 30 to 40 minutes. 
4. Transfer the pork to a serving platter, and let rest 
10 minutes before carving. 
roasted pork shoulder 
with sage and coriander 

SERVES 10 

2 tablespoons whole black peppercorns 

2 tablespoons coriander seeds 
4 garlic cloves, thinly sliced 


2 large shallots, thinly sliced 
2 tablespoons chopped fresh sage 


Coarse salt 
1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil 


1 boneless pork shoulder (about 6 pounds), 
trimmed 

1. Toast the peppercorns and coriander seeds in a 
small saute pan over medium-low heat until fragrant, 
about 5 minutes. Let cool completely. Transfer 
to a food processor. Add the garlic, shallots, sage, 
and 1 tablespoon salt, and grind to a chunky paste. 
With the processor running, slowly add the oil; mix 
until well combined. 
2. Untie the pork, if tied. Rub the pork with the spice 
mixture. Put it in a resealable plastic bag, and expel 
air; seal the bag. Marinate in the refrigerator, turning 
occasionally, overnight or up to 3 days. Let stand 
at room temperature 1 to 2 hours before cooking. 
3. Preheat the oven to 450 degrees F. Roll the pork, and tie 
it into a compact log with kitchen twine. Transfer 
to a small roasting or medium baking pan. Roast 
20 minutes. Reduce oven temperature to 350 degrees F; 
continue to cook until an instant-read thermometer 
inserted into the thickest part registers 150 degrees F, 
about 2 hours 15 minutes. Transfer to a warmed 
platter, cover with foil, and let rest 10 to 15 minutes 
before slicing. 
266 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


maple-glazed 
smoked vermont ham 

SERVES 15 TO 20 

One to two hours before baking, remove the ham 
from the refrigerator and let it come to room temperature. 


1 smoked bone-in ham (10 to 12 pounds), 
room temperature 


1/2 cup apricot jam 

2 tablespoons Dijon mustard 

3/4 cup pure maple syrup 
2 tablespoons dark rum 
1 garlic clove, minced 
Fresh bay leaves, for garnish (optional) 
Kumquats, for garnish (optional) 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees  F. Fit a large roasting 
pan with a rack; place the ham on the rack. Cover 
tightly with foil. Bake, rotating the pan halfway 
through, 4 hours. 
2. Meanwhile, make the glaze: In a small saucepan, 
heat the jam until liquefied. Strain through a fine 
sieve into a small bowl; discard the solids. Stir in 
the mustard, maple syrup, rum, and garlic. 
3. After 4 hours, remove the ham from the oven, and 
brush with the glaze. Continue baking the ham, 
glazing every 15 minutes, until an instant-read thermometer 
inserted into thickest part of the ham 
(avoiding bone) registers 140 degrees F, about 1 hour more. 
4. Remove from the oven, and transfer to a carving 
board or platter. Garnish the ham with bay 
leaves and kumquats, if desired. Slice thinly around 
the bone, and serve hot or at room temperature. 
pancetta-wrapped pork roast 

SERVES 4 

1 pork loin (11/2 pounds) 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil 


2 tablespoons finely chopped fresh 
rosemary, plus several sprigs 


1/4 pound pancetta (Italian bacon) or 
bacon, thinly sliced 


8 to 10 cipollini or small white 
onions, unpeeled 


1 teaspoon unsalted butter, softened 
1 teaspoon all-purpose flour 


1 cup chicken stock, preferably homemade 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Season the pork with 
salt and pepper. Heat the oil in a large cast-iron skillet 
over medium heat. Sear the pork on all sides 
until browned, about 10 minutes. Remove from heat. 
2. Rub the pork with the chopped rosemary; wrap 
with the pancetta, overlapping strips slightly. Lay 
a rosemary sprig on top; tie the pork with kitchen 
twine. Scatter onions and rosemary sprigs around 
the pork. Roast in the oven, basting occasionally 
with cooking juices, until the internal temperature 
is 145 degrees F on a meat thermometer, 35 to 40 minutes. 
Remove from the oven. Transfer the pork and 
onions to a platter; cover with foil. 
3. Make the pan sauce: In a small bowl, combine 
the butter and flour. Pour off the fat from the skillet; 
place over medium heat. Add the stock, scraping 
bottom of skillet to loosen browned bits. Bring 
to a boil; reduce the liquid slightly, about 2 minutes. 
Whisk in the butter mixture; cook until thickened. 
Season with salt and pepper. Serve hot with the pork 
and onions. 
MEAT 267 


five-spice pork tenderloin 

SERVES 6 

Five-spice powder is a pungent seasoning mix 
used widely in Chinese cooking. It is made of 
equal parts ground cloves, cinnamon, fennel 
seed, star anise, and Szechuan peppercorns. For 
a recipe, see page 650. 

1/4 cup Chinese five-spice powder 

2 teaspoons coarse salt 
1 pork tenderloin (about 13/4 pounds) 


3 tablespoons canola oil 

1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees  F. Combine the spice 
powder and salt on a plate; generously coat the pork 
tenderloins. Heat a large ovenproof skillet over 
medium-high heat, and pour in the oil. Add the tenderloins; 
brown well on all sides, about 4 minutes 
per side. 
2. Transfer to the oven, and roast until the meat is 
cooked through, about 15 minutes or until a meat 
thermometer inserted in the center registers 160 degrees F. 
Remove from the oven; let rest 5 minutes before 
slicing. Serve. 
grilled sausage 
with arugula pesto 

SERVES 4 

Save extra pesto to use on other grilled meats or 
fish. It will last up to 1 week in the refrigerator. 

1 bunch (about 4 ounces) arugula, stems 
trimmed, washed 


4 cloves garlic, peeled and smashed 
1 cup freshly grated Parmesan cheese 


11/2 teaspoons coarse salt 
1/2 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 

1/2 cup extra-virgin olive oil 

8 assorted Italian pork sausages, both hot 
and sweet varieties (about 1 pound) 


1. Make the pesto: Place the arugula and garlic in 
the bowl of a food processor. Pulse until finely 
chopped, scraping down the sides if necessary. Add 
the cheese, salt, pepper, and olive oil, and puree 
until smooth and well combined. 
2. Heat a grill to medium-high. Prick the sausages 
with a fork to allow excess fat to drip. Grill until 
cooked through, about 4 minutes per side. Serve 
the pesto over the grilled sausages. 
boneless pork chops 
with apple chutney 

SERVES 4 

4 tablespoons olive oil 

2 teaspoons coarse salt, plus more 
for seasoning 


1 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper, 
plus more for seasoning 


4 boneless center-cut pork chops, cut 3/4 inch 
thick (11/4 pounds) 

1 large onion, cut into   dice 

4 green apples (such as Granny Smith), 
peeled, cored, and cut into   dice 


1/2 cup cider vinegar 
1/2 cup golden raisins 


1 teaspoon ground ginger 
1/4 teaspoon dry mustard 


Pinch of cayenne pepper 

1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Heat 2 tablespoons 
olive oil in an ovenproof skillet over medium heat. 
Sprinkle salt and pepper on both sides of the pork 
chops; add to the skillet. Saute until golden brown, 
about 2 minutes; flip. Cook 2 minutes more; place 
the pan in the oven. Roast until the meat is cooked 
through and registers 155 degrees F on an instant-read thermometer, 
about 5 minutes. Transfer to a platter. 
2. Meanwhile, in a large saucepan, heat the remaining 
2 tablespoons olive oil over medium heat; 
add the onion. Saute over medium heat until 
translucent and beginning to brown, about 6 minutes. 
Add the apples; saute 4 minutes more. Add 
the vinegar, raisins, ginger, mustard, and cayenne. 
Stir well to combine; cover. Continue cooking, stirring 
occasionally, until the apples are very tender 
but still holding their shape, about 3 minutes. Season 
with salt and pepper; serve over the pork chops. 
268 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 







brine-cured pork kabobs 
with jalapenos and pineapple 


MAKES 8 

Brine-curing the pork makes it soft, tender, and 
juicy. The pork is cut into small pieces, so it only 
needs to be cured for 4 hours. 

6 cups cold water 

1/4 cup sugar 
3 tablespoons coarse salt, plus more 
for seasoning 
2 bay leaves 


1 tablespoon whole black peppercorns 
1 tablespoon allspice berries 


3 cloves garlic, chopped 
13/4 pounds pork loin, cut into 1  cubes 

1/2 pineapple, peeled, cored, and cut into 
  chunks 


16 medium jalapeno or other hot peppers, 
cut in half lengthwise 


Spicy Molasses Glaze (recipe follows) 

1 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper 
2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 


1. Combine the water, sugar, salt, bay leaves, peppercorns, 
allspice, and garlic in a nonreactive bowl. 
Add the pork, cover, and refrigerate for at least 4 
hours or overnight. Drain, and set aside. 
2. Thread 4 cubes of pork, alternating with pineapple 
chunks and pepper halves, onto 8 skewers. 
Brush with glaze, and season with salt and pepper. 
3. Arrange the skewers, off direct heat, on a hot grill. 
Grill, rotating the skewers and brushing with remaining 
glaze and olive oil to prevent sticking as 
necessary, until the pork is cooked through but 
juicy in the center, about 12 minutes, depending on 
the heat of the grill. The pineapples and peppers 
should be soft and charred. 







spicy molasses glaze 

MAKES ABOUT 1 CUP 

Brush on fish, chicken, and burgers. 

2 tablespoons molasses 

3 cloves garlic, minced 

2 serrano chiles or jalapeno peppers, 
minced 


1 piece (1 inch) fresh ginger, peeled and 
grated 


1/2 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes 

3/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil 
1/2 tablespoon coarse salt 
Pinch of freshly ground black pepper 


Whisk the molasses, garlic, chiles, ginger, red pepper 
flakes, and oil in a small bowl. Season with salt 
and pepper. Keep sealed at room temperature up 
to 1 week. 








chipotle-marinated pork 
tenderloin with black bean salsa 

SERVES 4 


1 canned chipotle chile in adobo sauce 
3 garlic cloves 


1/2 cup coarsely chopped white onion 
2 tablespoons fresh lime juice 


1 teaspoon sherry vinegar 
1 teaspoon dried Mexican oregano 


1 pound pork tenderloin, trimmed of fat 

1 can (19 ounces) black beans, drained and 
rinsed 


1 cup grape tomatoes, quartered 
1/4 cup finely chopped white onion 
1/4 cup finely chopped fresh cilantro 


3 tablespoons fresh lime juice 
2 teaspoons minced canned chipotle chile 
in adobo sauce 
1/2 teaspoon ground cumin 


MEAT 269 


1. Make the pork marinade: Process chile, garlic, 
onion, lime juice, vinegar, and oregano in a blender 
until smooth. Rub marinade all over the pork. Transfer 
pork to a dish, and cover with plastic wrap. Refrigerate 
overnight. 
2. Preheatthe ovento350 degrees F. Heat a grill pan over 
high heat. Grill pork until seared on all sides, about 2 
minutes per side. Transfer pan to the oven; cook until 
an instant read thermometer inserted into center of 
meat registers 145 degrees F, 20 to 25 minutes. Let pork stand 
at room temperature 5 to 10 minutes before slicing. 
3. Meanwhile, make the salsa: Stir together the black 
beans, tomatoes, onion, cilantro, lime juice, chile, 
and cumin in a small bowl. Serve with the pork. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 308 CALORIES, 8 G FAT, 

75 MG CHOLESTEROL, 27 G CARBOHYDRATE, 572 MG SODIUM, 

31 G PROTEIN, 9 G FIBER 








choucroute garni 

SERVES 8 

1 teaspoon whole coriander seeds 

1 teaspoon whole juniper berries 
4 whole cloves 


1/2 teaspoon whole black peppercorns 
1/2 teaspoon whole caraway seeds 


2 dried bay leaves 
6 garlic cloves, crushed 


3 tablespoons vegetable oil 
2 medium onions, thinly sliced 


1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 
1 pound double-smoked bacon, cut into 
 -thick slices 
1/2 pound fresh bacon or salt pork (in 1 piece) 


11/4 pounds smoked pork butt, sliced 
crosswise into  -thick pieces 

4 pounds fresh sauerkraut, rinsed 
and drained 


1 bottle (750 ml) dry Riesling 

8 medium red or Yukon Gold potatoes, 
or a combination (about 11/2 pounds total), 
peeled if desired 

8 small carrots, peeled 

3 coarse-textured smoked pork sausages, 
such as Hungarian kielbasa, bauerwurst, 
or smoked bratwurst (12 ounces total) 


3 fine-textured pork-and-beef sausages, 
such as knockwurst or frankfurters 
(12 ounces total) 


3 mild-spiced fine-textured white veal- 
and-pork sausages, such as weisswurst 
or bockwurst (12 ounces total) 


Fresh parsley sprigs, for garnish 

Variety of mustards, for serving 

1. Make a spice bundle: Place spices, bay leaves, and 
garlic on a square of cheesecloth; tie into a bundle 
with kitchen twine. 
2. Heat oil in a very large Dutch oven over medium 
heat. Add onions and salt. Cook, stirring occasionally, 
until onions are translucent, about 5 minutes. 
Add bacon, pork butt, and spice bundle. Cover with 
sauerkraut. Add wine and enough water to come 1 
inch below sauerkraut. Bring to a boil. Reduce heat 
to medium-low; cover, and simmer 45 minutes. 
3. Add potatoes and carrots. Cover; cook until almost 
tender, about 20 minutes. 
4. Using a skewer or the tip of a paring knife, poke 
a few holes into each sausage to prevent them from 
bursting. Place kielbasa in a dry skillet over medium 
heat. Cook, turning often, until browned, about 8 
minutes. Put all sausages into the Dutch oven. 
Cover; cook until heated through, about 15 minutes. 
5. Using a slotted spoon, transfer sausages and vegetables 
to a plate. Drain sauerkraut, and arrange on 
a serving platter. Arrange sausages and vegetables 
on top. Garnish with parsley; serve with mustards. 
270 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 








crispy pork-stuffed 
anaheim chiles 

SERVES 4 TO 6 

4 pounds boneless pork shoulder, 
trimmed and cut in   pieces 


1 tablespoon coarse salt 
12 large Anaheim chiles 


12 ounces Monterey Jack cheese, 
grated (about 31/2 cups) 


Quick Purple Tomatillo Sauce 
(recipe follows) 


Fresh cilantro sprigs, for garnish 

Flour tortillas, warmed, for serving 

1. Place pork in a large, heavy pot. Sprinkle with 
salt. Add water to cover. Bring to a boil. Reduce to 
a simmer. Cook, stirring occasionally, until pork is 
brown, about 11/2 hours (when water has evaporated, 
pork will brown in its fat). Set aside. 
2. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Place chiles directly 
over the flame of a gas-stove burner on high heat. 
Roast, turning with tongs, until blackened all over. 
(Alternatively, broil chiles on a baking sheet, turning, 
until skin has charred.) Transfer chiles to a large 
bowl, and cover immediately with plastic wrap. Set 
aside to steam, about 15 minutes. Peel chiles; discard 
skins. With stems intact, slit each chile lengthwise; 
carefully remove seeds and veins. Place, slit 
side up, on a baking sheet. 
3. Spread 2 tablespoons cheese in bottom of each 
chile, then fill with 1/3 cup pork. Sprinkle chiles with 
the remaining 2 cups cheese. Spoon 1 tablespoon 
tomatillo sauce over top of each chile. Bake 15 minutes. 
Garnish with cilantro; serve with tortillas and 
remaining tomatillo sauce. 
quick purple tomatillo sauce 

MAKES ABOUT 2 CUPS 

10 small purple or green tomatillos (about 
10 ounces total), husked and washed 


1/2 small onion, coarsely chopped 

2 jalapeno peppers, coarsely chopped 
6 sprigs fresh cilantro, leaves only 


11/2 teaspoons coarse salt 

1. Put the tomatillos in a medium saucepan; cover 
with water by 1 inch. Bring to a boil, then reduce to 
a simmer. Cook 4 minutes. Drain, reserving 1/2 cup 
cooking liquid. 
2. Process tomatillos, onion, jalapenos, cilantro, salt, 
and 1/4 cup liquid in a blender until a slightly chunky 
sauce forms, adding more liquid as needed. Refrigerate 
in an airtight container up to 3 days. 







sauteed pork cutlets 

SERVES 4 

8 pork cutlets (3 ounces each) 

1 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/2 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 


2 to 4 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

Juice of 1 lemon, plus lemon wedges 
for serving 


2 tablespoons finely grated Parmesan 
cheese, plus Parmesan curls shaved with 
a vegetable peeler for garnish (about 
1 ounce total) 


Fresh flat-leaf parsley for garnish 

Grainy mustard for serving 

1. Place pork cutlets between two sheets of parchment 
paper; using a meat mallet or a small, heavy 
skillet, pound to 1/8 inch thick. Season both sides 
of pork with salt and pepper. 
2. Heat 2 tablespoons oil in a large saucepan over 
medium-high heat. Working in two batches, add 
pork to pan, and cook, flipping once, until golden 
brown, 11/2 to 2 minutes per side. (If pan becomes 
dry, add more oil.) Transfer to a platter. 
3. Drizzle lemon juice over pork, and sprinkle with 
grated Parmesan. Garnish with Parmesan curls and 
parsley. Serve with lemon wedges and mustard. 
MEAT 271 






barbecued baby-back ribs 

SERVES 12 

You can cook the ribs a day ahead and store 
them, wrapped in plastic, in the refrigerator; 
bring them to room temperature before grilling. 

6 racks baby-back ribs 

4 celery stalks, coarsely chopped 
2 medium carrots, coarsely chopped 


1 large onion, coarsely chopped 
1 garlic clove, halved 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

2 recipes Pierre's Barbecue Sauce 
(recipe follows) 


1. Divide ribs between 2 large pots. Cover with cold 
water. Bring to a boil. Reduce to a simmer, and cook 
3 minutes, skimming any foam that rises to the surface. 
Drain; rinse under cold water. Cover ribs with 
cold water again. 
2. Divide celery, carrots, onion, and garlic between 
pots; add 1 tablespoon salt to each pot. Bring to a 
boil. Reduce to a simmer, and cook until ribs are 
tender, about 1 hour. Drain; discard vegetables. 
3. Preheat a grill to medium (if you are using a charcoal 
grill, coals are ready when you can hold your 
hand 5 inches above grill for just 5 to 6 seconds). 
Season ribs generously with salt and pepper; brush 
with barbecue sauce. Grill, turning frequently and 
brushing with sauce occasionally, until heated 
through and marked by grill, about 15 minutes. Cut 
into servings of about 3 ribs each; brush with more 
sauce. Serve immediately. 








pierre's barbecue sauce 

MAKES 21/2 TO 3 CUPS 

This sauce was created by chef Pierre Schaedelin. 

2 red bell peppers 

1/2 cup olive oil 
4 large onions, coarsely chopped 


3 garlic cloves, crushed 
1/4 teaspoon ground coriander 


1/2 teaspoon ground chili powder 

1/2 teaspoon cayenne pepper 
2/3 cup packed dark-brown sugar 
51/2 pounds tomatoes, cut into chunks 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
1/3 cup white wine vinegar 
1/4 cup Dijon mustard 


2 tablespoons honey 
4 teaspoons Worcestershire sauce 
1 tablespoon soy sauce 


1. Place the peppers directly over the flame of a gas-
stove burner on high heat or on a grill. Roast peppers, 
turning with tongs, until blackened all over. 
(Alternatively, broil peppers on a baking sheet, turning 
as each side becomes charred.) Transfer to a 
large bowl, and cover immediately with plastic 
wrap. Set aside to steam 15 minutes. Peel peppers; 
discard skin. Remove stems, seeds, and ribs; cut 
each pepper into pieces. Set aside. 
2. Heat oil in a large pot over medium-high heat. 
Add onions, garlic, and roasted peppers; cook, stirring 
occasionally, until onions are dark golden 
brown on the edges, 8 to 10 minutes. Stir in coriander, 
chili powder, and cayenne pepper; cook 30 
seconds. Add sugar; cook, stirring occasionally, 2 
minutes. Add tomatoes, 2 teaspoons salt, and 1/2 teaspoon 
pepper; cook, stirring occasionally, until 
tomatoes have broken down and are very soft, about 
20 minutes. 
3. Stir in the vinegar, mustard, honey, Worcestershire 
sauce, and soy sauce. Pour through a coarse 
sieve into a medium bowl, pressing out liquid with 
a spoon; discard solids. Return to stove, and bring 
to a boil. Reduce to a vigorous simmer, and cook, 
stirring occasionally, until reduced slightly and 
thickened, 15 to 20 minutes. Taste, and adjust for 
seasoning. The sauce can be refrigerated in an airtight 
container up to 3 days. 
272 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


poultry 



CHICKEN 









breaded chicken 
cutlets with sage 

SERVES 4 

To fry the sage leaves for garnish, place them 
in hot oil until they start to curl, about 3 seconds; 
remove with a slotted spoon. 

2 pounds boneless, skinless chicken cutlets 
(8 to 10 pieces), pounded about 1/4 inch 
thick, if needed 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


11/2 cups buttermilk 
1/2 teaspoon hot sauce, such as Tabasco 

2 cups plain dried bread crumbs 
(about 8 ounces) 


1/3 cup finely chopped fresh sage, plus 
fried leaves for garnish 


Vegetable oil, for frying 

1. Preheat the oven to 200 degrees F. Season the chicken 
with salt and pepper. Stir the buttermilk, hot sauce, 
11/2 teaspoons salt, and 1/4 teaspoon pepper in a 
medium bowl. Add the chicken; turn to coat well. 
Let marinate for about 15 minutes. Stir the bread 
crumbs and sage in another bowl; set aside. 
2. Heat about 1 inch oil in a large skillet until it 
reaches 365 degrees F on a deep-fry thermometer. Working 
with 1 cutlet at a time, transfer the chicken from 
the buttermilk mixture to the bread crumb mixture, 
coating both sides completely. Gently place in the 
hot oil. Cook, turning halfway through with tongs, 
until crisp and dark golden, about 5 minutes. Transfer 
to a rack or paper towels to drain. Transfer to a 
baking sheet, and put in the oven to keep warm. Remove 
any bits of coating from the skillet with a slotted 
spoon, and discard before adding more chicken. 
Repeat with the remaining chicken. Garnish with 
the fried leaves. 








roasted herbed chicken 
with vermouth pan sauce 

SERVES 4 

Roasting the garlic in its skin mellows and sweetens 
its flavor; to remove the cloves, squeeze them 
with your fingers or press on the cloves with a 
butter knife. 

1 whole chicken, rinsed, patted dry, 
and cut into 8 pieces 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
11/2 teaspoons finely chopped fresh tarragon 

1 tablespoon finely chopped fresh thyme 

11/2 teaspoons finely chopped fresh flat-leaf 
parsley 

8 garlic cloves, unpeeled 
1/2 cup dry vermouth 


1/4 cup homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock 


1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F, with the rack in the 
center. Put the chicken in a large bowl; season with 
salt and pepper. Add the oil, tarragon, thyme, and 
parsley, and toss to coat. Transfer the chicken and 
herbs to a 151/2 x 1  roasting pan; do not crowd. 
Scatter the garlic in the pan. Cook until the chicken 
skin is golden and crisp and the juices run clear 
when the thigh is pierced with a sharp knife, 45 to 
50 minutes. 
2. Transfer the chicken and garlic to a serving dish, 
and cover loosely with aluminum foil; set aside. 
Skim the fat from the pan with a spoon, and discard. 
Set the roasting pan over medium-high heat on 
stove. Add the vermouth, and cook, scraping up 
browned bits with a wooden spoon, until reduced 
by about half, about 4 minutes. Stir in the stock. 
Bring to a simmer; continue to cook until reduced 
by about half, about 2 minutes more. Pour through 
a fine sieve into a medium bowl, and discard the 
solids. Skim the fat with a spoon, and discard. Serve 
the sauce alongside the chicken and garlic. 
274 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 








chicken holy basil 

SERVES 4 TO 6 

10 garlic cloves, minced 

6 fresh Thai chiles, thinly sliced crosswise 
1/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons vegetable oil 


2 pounds boneless, skinless chicken breasts, 
cut into   pieces 

1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon Asian fish sauce 

2 teaspoons soy sauce 
41/2 teaspoons sugar 

Freshly ground pepper 

3 cups loosely packed fresh holy basil 
leaves, plus more for garnish 


Sticky or steamed jasmine rice, for serving 

1. Mash together the garlic and chiles using a mortar 
and pestle or the flat side of a large knife. Heat 
the oil in a wok or large skillet over medium-high 
heat. Add the garlic mixture. Cook, stirring, until 
the garlic is just golden, about 20 seconds. 
2. Add the chicken; cook, stirring often, until the 
chicken is cooked through, about 4 minutes. Stir in 
the fish sauce, soy sauce, sugar, and 11/2 teaspoons 
pepper. Add the basil; cook, stirring constantly, 
1 minute. Season with more pepper, if desired. Serve 
over rice. Garnish with basil. 








broiled yogurt-ginger 
chicken breasts 

SERVES 4 

For a side dish, try basmati rice cooked with a 
pinch of saffron. 

1 container (32 ounces) plain yogurt 

1 piece (5 inches) peeled fresh ginger, 
grated (about 1/4 cup) 


1/2 teaspoon ground cumin 

1/2 teaspoon cayenne pepper 
Coarse salt 


4 boneless, skinless chicken breast halves 
(about 8 ounces each) 


1 small red onion, thinly sliced 

1 cucumber, peeled, seeded, and chopped 
3 sprigs fresh cilantro, stems removed 


Juice of 1 lime 

1. Stir together the yogurt, ginger, cumin, 1/4 teaspoon 
cayenne, and 1/2 teaspoon salt in a 9 x 1  
baking dish. 
2. Starting on one long side, cut each chicken piece 
almost in half horizontally (stop about 1/2 inch before 
reaching opposite side). Open each piece like 
a book. 
3. Add the chicken to the marinade in the dish; turn 
to coat. Cover with plastic wrap. Refrigerate at least 
1 hour or up to 8 hours. 
4. Preheat the broiler. Toss together the red onion, 
cucumber, cilantro, lime juice, remaining 1/4 teaspoon 
cayenne (or to taste), and a pinch of salt in 
a small bowl. 
5. Transfer the chicken to a broiler pan. Discard the 
marinade. Broil the chicken, rotating the pan once, 
until cooked through, about 10 minutes. Top with 
the cucumber mixture. 








baked crisp parmesanromano 
chicken 

SERVES 4 

Serve this dish with arugula, tomatoes, blanched 
green beans, and crumbled Parmesan cheese 
tossed with extra-virgin olive oil and vinegar. 

1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil, plus more 
for the baking sheet 


1/4 cup plus 1 tablespoon red-wine vinegar 

1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/4 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes 


1/2 teaspoon dried oregano 
1 garlic clove, minced 


1 whole chicken (31/2 to 4 pounds), rinsed 
well, patted dry, and cut into 8 pieces 


1 cup fresh bread crumbs 
1/4 cup freshly grated Parmesan cheese 


1/4 cup freshly grated Pecorino Romano 
cheese 


2 tablespoons finely chopped fresh flat- 
leaf parsley 


1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 

POULTRY 275 


1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Whisk together the 
oil, vinegar, salt, red pepper flakes, oregano, and 
garlic in a 9 x 1  baking dish. Add the chicken 
to the marinade in the dish, turning each piece to 
coat. Cover with plastic wrap, and refrigerate at least 
1 hour or up to 8 hours. 
2. Stir together the bread crumbs, cheeses, parsley, 
and pepper in a medium bowl. Line a rimmed baking 
sheet with parchment paper. Oil the parchment. 
3. Dredge each chicken piece in the bread crumb 
mixture to coat; shake off excess. Transfer to the 
prepared baking sheet. 
4. Bake the chicken until the bread crumbs are 
golden and the chicken is cooked through, 45 to 50 
minutes. Using a spatula, loosen the chicken from 
the sheet before serving. 









lemon-tarragon 
roast chicken with vegetables 


SERVES 4 TO 6 

Red onions, cut at an angle, form a V-shaped 
roasting rack for the chicken. 

1 whole chicken (31/2 to 4 pounds), rinsed, 
trimmed of excess fat, and patted dry 


1 garlic bulb, halved horizontally 

2 sprigs fresh tarragon, plus 1 tablespoon 
chopped tarragon leaves 


3 tablespoons unsalted butter, softened 

1 shallot, finely chopped 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


2 lemons (1 halved, 1 thinly sliced) 
5 red onions (2 large and 3 small), peeled 


4 long, thin carrots, peeled (halved or 
quartered lengthwise if large) 


3 stalks celery 

6 small red potatoes, halved (or 3 russet 
potatoes, cut into thirds) 


1/2 cup dry white wine 

1/2 cup homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock 


1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Rub the chicken inside 
and out with 1 garlic half. Place both garlic 
halves and the tarragon sprigs in the cavity. Stir together 
the butter, shallot, chopped tarragon, 1/2 teaspoon 
salt, and 1/4 teaspoon pepper. Loosen the skin 
near the cavity with your hands; spread the butter 
mixture under the skin all over the flesh. 
2. Squeeze juice from the lemon halves over the 
chicken; place in cavity. Season the bird with 1 teaspoon 
salt and 1/2 teaspoon pepper. 
3. Halve the large onions horizontally at an angle. 
Arrange in the middle of a 9 x 1  roasting pan 
to form a square. Position halves so the slanted ends 
of each pair face each other, inward, and almost 
touch. Place the chicken, breast side up, on the 
onion rack. 
4. Quarter the small onions; arrange with the carrots, 
celery, and potatoes around bird. Tuck the 
lemon slices between the wings and breast and the 
legs and breast. Pour the wine and stock over 
the vegetables. 
5. Roast the chicken and vegetables, basting 2 or 
3 times with the pan juices, until an instant-read 
thermometer inserted into the thickest part of 
chicken thigh registers 165 degrees F and juices run clear, 
1 to 11/2 hours. 
6. Remove the pan from the oven, and let the 
chicken stand 10 minutes. Carve the chicken. 
Arrange the chicken and roasted vegetables (including 
rack onions) on a platter. Spoon the pan 
juices over the meat. 
276 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 






mini chicken potpies 
with herb dough 

MAKES 8 4-INCH PIES 

1 whole chicken (4 pounds), rinsed 
and patted dry 


4 cups homemade or low-sodium 
store-bought chicken stock 


1 large onion, halved 

2 bay leaves 
1/2 teaspoon whole black peppercorns 


3 sprigs fresh thyme, plus 2 tablespoons 
thyme leaves 


1 celery stalk, cut crosswise into thirds 

5 tablespoons unsalted butter 

9 ounces medium red potatoes, 
cut into   chunks 


12 white, red, or yellow pearl onions 
(halved lengthwise if large) 


1 medium leek, white and pale green 
parts only, cut into  -thick rounds 
and rinsed well 


2 medium carrots, peeled and cut 
into  -thick rounds 


6 ounces white mushrooms, halved 
lengthwise (quartered if large) 


1/4 cup plus 1 tablespoon all-purpose flour, 
plus more for dusting 


1 cup milk 

2 tablespoons coarsely chopped fresh 
flat-leaf parsley 


Finely grated zest of 1 lemon 
2 teaspoons coarse salt 


1/2 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 
Martha's Perfect Pate Brisee (page 647) 


2 tablespoons mixed fresh herb leaves, 
such as flat-leaf parsley, sage, chives, 
thyme, dill, rosemary, and oregano 


1 large egg 

1. Put the chicken, stock, large onion, bay leaves, 
peppercorns, thyme sprigs, and celery in a large 
(8-quart) pot. Add just enough water to cover the 
chicken. Cover the pot; bring the mixture to a boil. 
Uncover; reduce heat. Simmer 1 hour. 
2. Transfer the chicken to a cutting board (reserve 
the stock in the pot). Remove the skin from the 
chicken; discard. Cut the meat from the bones; discard 
the bones. Using a fork, shred the meat into 
bite-size pieces; set aside. 
3. Pour the stock through a fine sieve into a large 
bowl; discard the solids. Set aside 2 cups stock. (Reserve 
the remaining stock for another use. Cooled 
stock can be frozen in an airtight container up to 
4 months; thaw in the refrigerator.) 
4. Melt the butter in a large skillet over medium-
high heat. Add the potatoes and pearl onions. Cook, 
stirring occasionally, until the potatoes begin to 
turn golden, about 5 minutes. Add the leek, carrots, 
and mushrooms; cook, stirring occasionally, until 
softened, about 5 minutes more. Add the flour; cook, 
stirring, 1 minute. 
5. Stir in the reserved 2 cups stock and the milk. 
Bring to a simmer; cook, stirring constantly, until 
thick and bubbling, 2 to 3 minutes. Stir in the chicken, 
parsley, thyme leaves, zest, salt, and pepper. 
6. Divide the chicken mixture evenly among 8 
4 x   ramekins. Let cool slightly. 
7. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Roll out the pate 
brisee on a lightly floured surface to 1/4 inch thick. 
Arrange the mixed herbs on top; roll out the dough 
with a lightly floured pin to 1/8 inch thick, gently 
pressing herbs. 
8. Using a fluted (or plain) round dough cutter (41/2 
inches in diameter), cut out 8 rounds from the 
dough. Lightly beat the egg with 1 tablespoon water. 
Brush the top edges of the ramekins with egg wash. 
Place a dough round over each ramekin; gently 
press to seal. Chill in the freezer until the dough is 
firm, about 10 minutes. 
9. Brush the dough with egg wash. Cut 4 slits in top 
of each dough round for steam vents. Bake until the 
crust is golden brown and the filling is bubbling, 
35 to 40 minutes. 
POULTRY 277 


southern indian chicken 
curry with mustard seeds 

SERVES 4 

This dish was inspired by one of cookbook author 
Madhur Jaffrey's lamb curries. 

1/4 cup vegetable oil 

6 whole dried red hot chiles, each broken 
into 3 or 4 pieces 


2 teaspoons brown or yellow mustard seeds 
1 whole cinnamon stick (3 inches) 

1/2 teaspoon urad dal or yellow split peas 
11/4 cups very thinly sliced shallots (about 4) 

10 garlic cloves, very thinly sliced 
10 fresh curry leaves (optional) 


2 teaspoons grated peeled fresh ginger 
11/4 cups chopped plum tomatoes (about 3) 

11/4 pounds boneless, skinless chicken thighs, 
cut into   pieces 

1/4 teaspoon ground turmeric 

Coarse salt 
Raita, for serving 


Pooris, for serving (optional) 

1. Heat the oil in a large Dutch oven over medium-
high heat until hot but not smoking. Add the chiles, 
mustard seeds, cinnamon, and urad dal; cook, shaking 
the pot, until the seeds pop, about 45 seconds. 
Add the shallots, garlic, and curry leaves; cook, stirring, 
until the shallots are golden, about 4 minutes. 
Add the ginger; cook, stirring, 1 minute. Add the 
tomatoes; cook, stirring, 2 minutes. 
2. Add the chicken; sprinkle with the turmeric and 
11/2 teaspoons salt. Cook, stirring occasionally, about 
4 minutes. Stir in 2 cups water. Bring to a boil. 
Cover; reduce heat to medium-low. Simmer until 
the chicken is very tender, about 30 minutes. 
3. Uncover. Bring to a boil over medium-high heat. 
Boil until the sauce coats the meat, about 10 minutes. 
Season with salt. Serve with raita and pooris, 
if desired. 
chicken scaloppine with 
arugula, lemon, and parmesan 

SERVES 4 

To prevent the arugula from wilting, let the 
chicken cool slightly before serving. 

4 boneless, skinless chicken breast 
halves (about 6 ounces each) 


1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 

Freshly ground pepper 
Olive oil cooking spray 


4 teaspoons fresh lemon juice 
2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 


8 ounces arugula (about 1 bunch) 

1 ounce Parmesan cheese, such as 
Parmigiano-Reggiano 


4 lemon wedges 

1. One at a time, place the chicken breast halves on 
a cutting board between 2 sheets of plastic wrap. 
Pound with the flat side of a meat mallet or the bottom 
of a small, heavy skillet until 1/4 inch thick. 
Sprinkle each piece all over with 1/8 teaspoon salt; 
season with pepper. 
2. Coat a 1  nonstick skillet with cooking 
spray, and heat over medium heat until hot but not 
smoking. Put 2 chicken breast halves, smooth sides 
down, in the pan; they should lie flat without touching. 
Cook 4 minutes; turn, and cook until no longer 
pink in the center, 2 to 3 minutes more. Wipe the 
skillet clean; repeat with the remaining chicken. 
3. Whisk together the lemon juice and 4 teaspoons 
oil in a large bowl. Add the arugula; toss to coat. 
Divide among 4 plates. Top with a chicken breast 
half, and drizzle each with 1/2 teaspoon oil. With a 
vegetable peeler, shave the cheese over the plates, 
dividing it evenly. Serve with lemon wedges. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 295 CALORIES, 11 G FAT, 

103 MG CHOLESTEROL, 6 G CARBOHYDRATE, 480 MG SODIUM, 

44 G PROTEIN, 2 G FIBER 

278 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 





rolled chicken breasts with 
almond-mint pesto and zucchini 

SERVES 4 

1 ounce whole blanched almonds 
(about 1/4 cup) 
1 medium shallot, coarsely chopped 
11/4 cups loosely packed fresh mint leaves 
1/2 cup finely grated pecorino cheese 
(about 1 ounce) 
1 tablespoon plus 2 teaspoons extra-
virgin olive oil 
4 boneless, skinless chicken breast halves 
(about 6 ounces each) 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
Olive oil cooking spray 
3 medium zucchini (about 6 ounces each), 
cut into 3 x   strips 
2 garlic cloves, smashed 
1 tablespoon red-wine vinegar 

1. Toast the almonds in a skillet over medium heat, 
tossing frequently, until golden and fragrant, about 
6 minutes. Let cool completely. Process the almonds 
and shallot in a food processor until a coarse paste 
forms. Add 1 cup mint; pulse a few times until 
coarsely chopped. Add the cheese and oil; pulse a 
few times until combined. Transfer to a small bowl. 
2. One at a time, place the chicken breast halves on 
a cutting board between 2 sheets of plastic wrap. 
Pound with the flat side of a meat mallet or the bottom 
of a small, heavy skillet until 1/8 to 1/4 inch thick. 
Sprinkle each piece all over with 1/8 teaspoon salt; 
season with pepper. 
3. Put the breast halves on a cutting board, smooth 
side down, and spread evenly with pesto. Roll up 
the chicken, starting with the pointed tip of each 
piece. Secure with 2 toothpicks, pushing them in 
sideways at an angle; set aside. 
4. Coat a 1  nonstick skillet with cooking 
spray, and heat over medium-high heat until hot 
but not smoking. Add the zucchini and garlic; season 
with 1/8 teaspoon salt. Cook, stirring occasionally, 
until the zucchini just turns golden brown, 
about 5 minutes. Reduce heat to medium, and cook, 
tossing occasionally, 5 minutes. Stir in the vinegar; 
season with pepper. Transfer the zucchini to a 
medium bowl, and cover with foil. 
5. Wipe the skillet clean. Coat with cooking spray; 
heat over medium heat until hot but not smoking. 
Add the rolled chicken, and cook, turning to brown 
all sides, about 5 minutes. Reduce heat to medium-
low, and continue cooking until the chicken is no 
longer pink in the center, 20 to 25 minutes. Let rest 
5 minutes, and cut each roll into 5 pieces. Toss the 
reserved zucchini with 1/4 cup mint. Divide the zucchini 
and chicken among 4 plates. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 339 CALORIES, 13 G FAT, 

103 MG CHOLESTEROL, 9 G CARBOHYDRATE, 532 MG 

SODIUM, 45 G PROTEIN, 3 G FIBER 

baked buttermilk chicken 

SERVES 4 

Olive oil cooking spray 

4 chicken drumsticks (about 1 pound), 
skins removed 


2 whole boneless, skinless chicken 
breasts (about 13/4 pounds), halved 


21/2 cups low-fat buttermilk 
4 cups cornflakes, finely crushed 

3/4 teaspoon Old Bay seasoning 
1/2 teaspoon dried thyme 
1/2 teaspoon dried basil 

1/4 teaspoon cayenne pepper 

Lemon wedges, for garnish (optional) 
Flat-leaf parsley sprig, for garnish (optional) 


1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees  F. Generously coat a 
rimmed baking sheet with cooking spray; set aside. 
Rinse the chicken, and pat dry. Transfer to a 
medium bowl. Pour the buttermilk over the chicken. 
Cover, and let marinate 1 hour in refrigerator. 
2. Toss the cornflakes, Old Bay, thyme, basil, and 
cayenne in a large bowl. Remove 1 piece of chicken 
at a time from the buttermilk, letting excess drip 
back into the bowl; dredge in the cornflake mixture. 
3. Transfer the pieces to the baking sheet; lightly 
coat each with cooking spray. Bake, turning the 
pieces once, until crisp and cooked through, about 
40 minutes. Transfer to a platter; garnish with 
lemon wedges and parsley, if desired. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 362 CALORIES, 5 G FAT, 

119 MG CHOLESTEROL, 32 G CARBOHYDRATE, 586 MG 

SODIUM, 46 G PROTEIN, 1 G FIBER 

POULTRY 279 





barbecued chicken 

SERVES 8 

4 whole chickens (about 3 pounds each) 
11/4 quarts Barbecue Sauce (recipe follows) 

1. Rinse the chickens inside and out under cold 
water, and pat dry. Truss the legs with kitchen twine, 
and set aside. 
2. Heat a charcoal or gas grill. If using a charcoal 
grill, arrange the hot coals around the inside edge 
of grill. Arrange the chickens, breast sides up, in a 
row across the center. If using a gas grill, cook the 
chickens over medium heat until brown on all sides, 
rotating every 5 to 7 minutes; cover the grill as 
needed to maintain heat. 
3. Baste the chickens with barbecue sauce. Continue 
cooking, basting frequently, until an instant-
read thermometer registers 170 degrees F in the breast and 
180 degrees  F in the thickest part of the thigh (avoiding 
bone), about 1 hour. If the chickens brown too 
quickly before they are cooked through, transfer to 
baking pans and finish in a 350 degrees F oven. 
barbecue sauce 

MAKES 21/2 QUARTS 

This recipe makes enough sauce for 8 chickens. 
Refrigerate leftover sauce for up to 2 weeks. 

3 tablespoons canola oil 

2 large onions, finely chopped 

6 garlic cloves, minced 

2 cans (28 ounces each) crushed tomatoes 
21/2 cups cider vinegar 

2 cups firmly packed dark-brown sugar 

1 cup honey 

3 tablespoons chili powder 

2 tablespoons soy sauce 

2 tablespoons hot dry mustard 

2 tablespoons paprika 

1 tablespoon coarse salt 

Heat the oil in a large, heavy-bottomed saucepan 
over medium heat. Add the onions and garlic; cook 
until golden brown, about 15 minutes. Add the remaining 
ingredients; bring to a boil. Reduce heat; 
simmer uncovered, stirring occasionally, until the 
sauce thickens, about 2 hours. 







chicken and dumplings 

SERVES 6 

If you want to make the dish in advance, prepare 
the chicken and sauce through step 2. Let cool 
completely, then cover and refrigerate overnight. 
Rewarm gently before proceeding. 

for the chicken 

1 pound boneless, skinless chicken thighs 
(5 to 6) 
1 pound boneless, skinless chicken 
breast halves (about 3 pieces) 
1/2 teaspoon fine sea salt, plus more 
for the cooking water 
1/8 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 
1 tablespoon unsalted butter 
1 large onion, finely chopped 
1 141/2-ounce can low-sodium chicken 
broth, skimmed of fat 
11/2 teaspoons finely chopped fresh thyme 
2 tablespoons cornstarch 
2 tablespoons all-purpose flour 
2 cups low-fat milk 
3 carrots, peeled and diagonally 
sliced 1/4 inch thick 
1/2 pound green beans, trimmed and cut 
into   pieces 

for the dumplings 

1 cup all-purpose flour 
1/2 cup yellow cornmeal 
2 teaspoons baking powder 
1/4 teaspoon fine sea salt 
2 tablespoons cold unsalted butter, 
cut in bits 


3/4 cup low-fat milk 
1. Sprinkle the chicken with salt and pepper. Heat 
a 6-quart Dutch oven over medium; add the thighs. 
Cook, turning once, until nicely browned on both 
sides and cooked through, 8 to 10 minutes. Transfer 
to a platter. Repeat with the breasts; cut the 
breasts crosswise into thirds. 
2. Add the butter to the pot; when melted, add the 
onion, cover, and cook, stirring occasionally, until 
softened, about 6 minutes. Stir in the broth and 
thyme; bring to a boil. Combine the cornstarch 
and flour in a bowl. Gradually whisk in the milk, and 
whisk the milk mixture into the broth. Boil, whisking, 
280 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


until thickened, about 5 minutes. Remove from heat; 
return the chicken to the pot. 

3. Bring a saucepan of water to a boil; add salt. Add 
the carrots and green beans; cook until crisp-tender, 
about 5 minutes. Drain in a colander, rinsing with 
cold water to stop the cooking. Stir into the chicken 
mixture in the pot. 
4. Prepare the dumpling dough: In a medium bowl, 
whisk together the flour, cornmeal, baking powder, 
and salt. Add the butter; cut into the dry mixture 
with your fingers until mealy. Pour in the milk; stir 
with a fork until the dough comes together. Return 
the chicken mixture to a simmer, and drop the 
dough by tablespoons on the surface of the stew. 
Cover; cook for 15 minutes without lifting the lid. 
(The dumplings will puff up.) Serve. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 442 CALORIES, 12 G FAT, 

126 MG CHOLESTEROL, 42 G CARBOHYDRATE, 810 MG 

SODIUM, 40 G PROTEIN, 4 G FIBER 







grilled soy-lime chicken breasts 

SERVES 4 

1/4 cup fresh lime juice (about 2 limes) 

1/4 cup soy sauce 

1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil 

4 boneless, skinless chicken breasts 

1 head Boston lettuce, washed, leaves 

separated 
1 bunch fresh mint 
1 bunch fresh cilantro 


1. Whisk together the lime juice, soy sauce, and oil 
in a bowl. Place the chicken breasts on a work surface 
between 2 layers of waxed paper or plastic 
wrap. Using the smooth side of a meat pounder, 
pound the chicken breasts until all the pieces are 
an even   thickness. 
2. Place the chicken breasts in a resealable plastic 
bag or glass baking dish. Pour the marinade into 
the bag or over the chicken in a dish. Refrigerate at 
least 3 hours or overnight. 
3. Heat a grill or grill pan over medium heat. Remove 
the chicken from the marinade, letting excess 
drip off. Grill the chicken until cooked through, 
about 3 minutes per side. Shred or slice the chicken, 
and serve with lettuce leaves and herbs on the side. 
crisp mustard-glazed 
chicken breasts 

SERVES 4 

4 boneless chicken breasts, skin on 

2 tablespoons olive oil, plus more 
for the breasts 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

4 tablespoons unsalted butter, softened 
21/2 tablespoons Dijon mustard 

3/4 cup coarse bread crumbs 
2 tablespoons chopped fresh thyme, 
plus more for garnish 


3/4 cup homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock 
1/2 cup heavy cream 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees  F. Rub the chicken 
breasts lightly with the olive oil, and season with 
salt and pepper. 
2. Combine 2 tablespoons butter with the mustard; 
reserve 2 teaspoons for the sauce. Melt the remaining 
2 tablespoons butter; mix with the bread crumbs 
and thyme, and season with salt and pepper. 
3. In a large ovenproof skillet, heat oil over medium-
high heat. Sear the chicken, skin side down, until 
crispy, about 5 minutes. Remove from heat. Smear 
with the mustard mixture, and sprinkle with the 
bread crumbs. Turn skin side up; apply the mustard 
mixture and bread crumbs. 
4. Transfer the skillet to the oven, and roast until 
the chicken is cooked through and the top is golden 
brown, 15 to 20 minutes. 
5. Transfer the chicken to a serving platter. Add the 
stock and cream to the skillet over medium heat, 
and stir with a wooden spoon until creamy and reduced 
to 3/4 cup, about 3 minutes. Remove from heat, 
and stir in the reserved mustard mixture. Strain 
through a fine sieve, and serve with the chicken. 
Garnish with thyme. 
POULTRY 281 







chicken cassoulet with 
crisp bread crumb topping 

SERVES 6 

5 garlic cloves, minced 
1 tablespoon chopped fresh rosemary 


11/2 teaspoons chopped fresh thyme 
2 tablespoons balsamic vinegar 

6 boneless, skinless chicken thighs, 
trimmed of fat 


1 pound dried cannellini beans, soaked 
overnight in cold water 


3 carrots, cut into   pieces 

2 stalks celery, cut into   pieces 
1 onion, cut into   pieces 


1 dried bay leaf 
2 tablespoons finely chopped fresh sage 


1 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/2 teaspoon extra-virgin olive oil 


1 cup fresh bread crumbs 

1. Marinate the chicken: In a bowl large enough 
to hold the chicken thighs, combine 2 garlic cloves, 
the rosemary, 1/2 teaspoon thyme, and the vinegar. 
Add the chicken; toss to coat. Cover; refrigerate 1 
to 2 hours. 
2. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F, with the rack in the 
upper third. Drain the beans, and place them in a 
large stockpot with the carrots, celery, onion, 
remaining 3 garlic cloves, bay leaf, sage, and remaining 
teaspoon thyme. Fill with enough cold 
water to cover by about 4 inches; bring to a simmer 
over medium-high heat. Reduce heat to medium-
low; cook, stirring occasionally, until the beans are 
tender, 11/2 to 2 hours. 
3. Transfer the bean mixture to a colander set over 
a bowl, reserving the cooking liquid; let cool 
slightly. Puree half the mixture in the bowl of a food 
processor fitted with the metal blade. With the 
motor running, pour in about 1 cup reserved cooking 
liquid until thick and smooth. Return to the pot 
with the remaining bean mixture. Add the salt; stir 
to combine. 
4. Brush an 8 x 8 x 2  baking dish with the 
oil. Remove the chicken from the marinade, and 
arrange it in a single layer in the prepared dish. 
Bake until the chicken is cooked through, about 
15 minutes. 
5. Remove the dish from the oven; pour the bean 
mixture over the chicken, and sprinkle evenly with 
the bread crumbs. Set the dish on a baking sheet; 
return to the oven, and bake until the bread crumbs 
are golden brown and the beans are bubbling, about 
30 minutes. Remove from the oven; serve hot. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 446 CALORIES, 5 G FAT, 

54 MG CHOLESTEROL, 68 G CARBOHYDRATE, 524 MG 

SODIUM, 34 G PROTEIN, 18 G FIBER 








herb-stuffed chicken breasts 

SERVES 4 

1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil 

4 leeks, white and light-green parts, washed 
well and sliced into   rounds 

1 tablespoon finely chopped fresh rosemary 

1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon fresh 
thyme leaves 


1 teaspoon coarse salt 

1 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 

2 whole boneless, skinless chicken 
breasts (about 11/3 pounds), halved 


2 slices whole-wheat bread 

4 teaspoons Dijon mustard 

1 cup homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock, skimmed of fat 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. In a large ovenproof 
skillet, heat 1 teaspoon oil over medium heat. Add 
the leeks, and cook 4 minutes. Add 2 teaspoons 
each rosemary and thyme; cook 1 minute more. Season 
with 1/4 teaspoon salt and 1/2 teaspoon pepper. 
Transfer to a medium bowl; let cool. 
2. Using a sharp knife, carve a pocket in the center 
of each chicken breast by inserting the tip into 
the thickest part and cutting an opening (leaving 
about 1 inch uncut on each side), being careful not 
to cut all the way through the breast. Place 2 tablespoons 
leek mixture in each pocket. Heat 1 teaspoon 
oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat. 
282 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


Add the chicken breasts, and saute until golden, 
about 3 minutes on each side. Remove from heat, 
and transfer to a clean work surface. 

3. Place the bread in the bowl of a food processor 
fitted with the metal blade, and process until fine 
crumbs form. Transfer the bread crumbs to a bowl. 
Add the remaining teaspoon rosemary and 1 teaspoon 
thyme. Season with the remaining 3/4 teaspoon 
salt and 1/2 teaspoon pepper. Spread 1 
teaspoon mustard over one side of each chicken 
breast, and cover with about 3 tablespoons herbed 
bread crumbs, pressing gently to adhere. Drizzle 
the remaining teaspoon oil over all. 
4. Place the skillet in the oven; roast the chicken 
until it is golden and cooked through, about 15 minutes. 
Remove from the oven; transfer the chicken 
to a serving dish, and cover with foil while you make 
the sauce. Place the skillet over medium heat, and 
add the chicken stock; deglaze the pan, stirring to 
loosen any browned bits with a wooden spoon. Continue 
cooking until the stock is reduced by half, 
about 3 minutes. Remove from heat; add the remaining 
teaspoon thyme. Serve with the chicken. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 296 CALORIES, 7 G FAT, 
86 MG CHOLESTEROL, 20 G CARBOHYDRATE, 807 MG 
SODIUM, 37 G PROTEIN, 2 G FIBER 









braised chicken with 
olives, carrots, and chickpeas 


SERVES 4 

Serve this stewlike chicken dish over couscous or 
mashed potatoes, or with a crusty baguette to 
soak up the flavorful broth. We used Cerignola 
olives from southern Italy; they are large and firm 
enough to hold up to slow cooking methods like 
braising. 

1 tablespoon olive oil 

4 whole chicken legs, skinned and cut into 
thighs and drumsticks (about 21/2 pounds) 


1 medium yellow onion, cut into   dice 
3 carrots, cut into   dice 


2 garlic cloves, minced 

1 1  piece fresh ginger, finely chopped 
(about 2 tablespoons) 


1 cup low-sodium store-bought 
chicken broth 


1 cup water 
1 cup dry white wine 


4 sprigs thyme 
1/3 cup raisins 


1/2 cup pitted and roughly chopped large 
green olives, such as Cerignola (about 6) 


3/4 cup canned chickpeas, rinsed 
and drained 
1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. In a large ovenproof 
skillet or Dutch oven, heat the olive oil over medium 
heat. Place the chicken pieces in the skillet, being 
careful not to overcrowd the pan. Saute until the 
chicken is nicely crisped and browned on both 
sides, about 5 minutes per side. Transfer the 
chicken to a large plate, and set aside. 
2. Reduce heat to medium-low; to the same skillet, 
add the onion, carrots, garlic, and ginger. Saute, stirring 
frequently, until the onion is soft and translucent, 
about 5 minutes. Add the chicken broth, the 
water, and wine; bring to a boil, and deglaze the pan 
by scraping up any browned bits from the bottom 
with a wooden spoon. Return the chicken to the skillet, 
and add the thyme. Bring the liquid back to a boil; 
cover, and transfer to the oven. Braise 45 minutes. 
POULTRY 283 


3. Remove the skillet from the oven, and stir in the 
raisins, olives, and chickpeas. Return to the oven; 
continue braising, uncovered, 20 minutes more. Remove 
from oven; discard the thyme. Serve hot. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 406 CALORIES, 14 G 

FAT, 139 MG CHOLESTEROL, 26 G CARBOHYDRATE, 868 MG 

SODIUM, 36 G PROTEIN, 5 G FIBER 






poached chicken with 
hot english mustard 

SERVES 4 

This recipe yields excess chicken stock. The excess 
can be kept in plastic containers and frozen 
for several months. 

2 carrots, peeled and cut in half 

1 stalk celery, cut in half 
2 onions, cut in half 


3 stems fresh flat-leaf parsley 
10 whole black peppercorns 


1 4-pound whole chicken, rinsed and 
patted dry 


Coarse salt 
4 slices French bread, about 1/3 inch thick 


1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil 
1 small bunch watercress 


1/4 cup hot English mustard, or to taste 

1. Place the carrots, celery, onions, parsley, and peppercorns 
in a stockpot. Add the chicken. Fill the pot 
with enough cold water to cover the chicken by 
1 inch. 
2. Set over medium-high heat, and bring the water 
to a boil. Reduce heat, and allow to simmer, skimming 
off any foam that rises to the surface, for 1 hour. 
3. Remove the chicken from the stock; set aside. 
Strain the stock through a very fine sieve or chinois. 
Discard the solids. Transfer the stock to a 
metal bowl. Set the bowl in another bowl, full of 
ice water. Let stand until the stock is completely 
chilled, replacing the ice if necessary, and fat can 
be skimmed off the surface of the stock. 
4. Meanwhile, when the chicken is cool enough to 
handle, remove the skin and discard. Carefully pull 
the meat off the bones (it should fall away quite easily), 
keeping it in large chunks when possible. 

5. Return 5 cups stock to the stockpot or a large 
saucepan. Bring to a boil; adjust the seasoning with 
salt. Reduce heat to a simmer; simmer until stock 
has become very flavorful and reduced by 1 cup, 
about 15 minutes. Add the pieces of chicken; cook 
just until heated through, about 5 minutes. 
6. Toast the bread until golden, and brush with the 
olive oil. Serve the chicken in a wide bowl with a 
ladle of hot broth. Add a handful of watercress to 
each bowl. Place a spoonful of mustard on toast, 
sprinkle with salt, and serve on the side. 






grilled chicken paillards 
with endive and radicchio 

SERVES 6 

3 whole boneless, skinless chicken 
breasts, split (about 2 pounds) 


Basic Marinade (page 647) 

3 heads Belgian endive, halved lengthwise 

2 large heads radicchio, each 
cut in 6 wedges 


2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


3 lemons, cut in half crosswise 
Rosemary sprigs, for garnish 


Thyme sprigs, for garnish 

1. Cut open two sides of a resealable plastic bag. 
Place 1 chicken breast half in the bag; pound to 
  thickness using a meat pounder. Transfer 
to a nonmetal container. Repeat with the remaining 
chicken. Add the marinade. Chill for 2 hours. 
2. Brush the endive and radicchio with the olive oil; 
sprinkle with salt and pepper; set aside. Brush the 
cut sides of the lemons with olive oil. 
3. Heat a grill or grill pan. Remove the chicken from 
the marinade; grill until browned and cooked 
through, 2 to 3 minutes on each side. Transfer to a 
serving platter. 
4. Grill the endive, radicchio, and lemons until 
nicely browned, about 3 minutes; turn as needed. 
Serve on the platter with the chicken, garnished 
with rosemary and thyme. 
284 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 




barbecued chicken kabobs with 
potatoes and summer squash 

MAKES 8 

The potatoes must be parboiled so they will be 
done at the same time as the chicken. 

11/2 chicken breasts (3 halves), cut 
into   cubes 

2 cups Barbecue Sauce (page 280), 
or good-quality store-bought 


1 cup water 
11/2 tablespoons coarse salt 

11/4 pounds new or baby fingerling potatoes 

3/4 pound green or yellow summer squash 
(about 2), cut into   pieces 
2 tablespoons olive oil 

1 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 

1. Place the chicken in a large bowl. Add the barbecue 
sauce; toss. Cover, and refrigerate for at least 
30 minutes or overnight. 
2. Place the water in a large saucepan. Add 1 tablespoon 
salt and the potatoes. Bring to a boil over 
high heat. Reduce heat; simmer until the potatoes 
are almost tender when pierced with a knife, about 
10 minutes. Do not overcook. Drain; halve. Set aside. 
3. Thread 4 cubes of chicken, alternating with potatoes 
and squash, on each of 8 skewers. Gently 
brush the vegetables with some oil. Season with the 
remaining 1/2 tablespoon salt and the pepper. 
4. Arrange the skewers, off direct heat, on a 
medium-hot grill. Grill, rotating the skewers and 
brushing with olive oil as necessary to prevent 
sticking, until cooked through, about 12 minutes 
depending on the heat of the grill. The vegetables 
should be soft and slightly charred. 
chicken enchiladas 

SERVES 6 TO 8 

These can be made up to 1 day ahead or frozen 
up to 1 month ahead. Bring to room temperature 
before baking. 

1 whole chicken (3 to 4 pounds) 

2 quarts homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock 


2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
1 onion, halved, cut into   slices 


2 green or red bell peppers, seeded and cut 
into   strips 


Enchilada Sauce (recipe follows) 

12 6-inch corn tortillas 

2 cups grated Monterey Jack cheese 
(about 6 ounces) 


2 cups grated sharp Cheddar cheese 
(about 6 ounces) 


Sour cream (optional) 

1. Place the chicken in a large pot, and pour the 
chicken stock over it. Add enough water to cover 
if necessary. Bring to a boil, reduce to a simmer, and 
cook until the chicken is cooked through and very 
tender, about 1 hour. Transfer to a bowl to cool, and 
reserve the stock to use for the enchilada sauce, if 
desired. When the chicken is cool enough to handle, 
remove the meat from the bones, and shred; 
set aside. 
2. Heat the olive oil in a large skillet over medium 
heat. Add the onion, and cook until the slices start 
to soften, about 5 minutes. Add the peppers, and 
cook until tender, about 7 minutes. Transfer to a 
bowl, and set aside. 
3. When ready to assemble, preheat the oven to 
350 degrees  F. Place the enchilada sauce in a medium 
saucepan over medium heat. When hot, dip the tortillas 
into the sauce, one at a time, to soften, and 
place side by side on 2 baking sheets. Divide the 
shredded chicken and pepper mixture among the 
tortillas. Place the cheeses in a bowl, and toss to 
combine. Top each tortilla with 2 tablespoons 
grated cheese. Roll up the tortillas, and place snugly, 
POULTRY 285 


seam side down, in a 9 x 1  ovenproof baking 
dish. Top them with the remaining enchilada sauce 
and with the remaining grated cheese. Bake until 
the enchiladas are heated through and the cheese 
is melted, about 30 minutes. Serve with sour cream, 
if desired. 







enchilada sauce 

MAKES 4 CUPS 

To tone down the sauce for little mouths, omit 
some of the chiles. 

5 long fresh red chiles 

1 cup homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock 


2 cups water 

4 large tomatoes 

1 small poblano chile 

1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil 

1 white onion, cut into   dice 

2 scallions, chopped 

3 garlic cloves, minced 

1/2 cup tomato paste 

1 teaspoon ground cumin 

1 teaspoon fresh oregano, chopped 

1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 

1. Cut the chiles in half lengthwise; remove and 
discard the seeds and ribs. Set aside. In a small 
saucepan, bring the chicken stock and the water 
to a simmer. Add the chiles; simmer until tender, 
about 15 minutes. Set aside. Fill a medium 
saucepan with water; bring to a boil. Fill a large 
bowl with ice and water; set aside. Cut an X in the 
tomato bottoms; add to the boiling water one at 
a time. Simmer until the skin begins to peel. Transfer 
the tomatoes to the ice bath immediately; 
cool. When cool, peel and discard skins; chop, 
and set aside. 
2. Place the poblano pepper directly on the trivet 
of a gas stove over high heat. Turn the pepper with 
tongs as each side blackens. (You may also place 
the pepper on a baking pan and broil in the oven, 
turning as each side becomes charred.) Transfer to 
a bowl, cover with plastic wrap, and let steam for 
about 15 minutes. Peel off the blackened skin; 
discard. Cut the pepper in half; discard the seeds. 
Roughly chop the pepper, and set aside along with 
any juices that have collected in the bowl. 

3. Heat the olive oil in a large high-sided skillet 
over medium heat. Add the onion, scallions, and 
garlic; saute until translucent, about 10 minutes. 
Add the tomatoes, tomato paste, red chiles and liquid, 
poblanos and liquid, cumin, oregano, and salt. 
Stir to combine. Simmer gently for 15 minutes. 
Transfer to the jar of a blender or a food processor; 
puree until smooth. Return to the pan; keep hot 
if assembling enchiladas, or refrigerate up to 4 days. 





normandy-style chicken 
and leeks with creme fraiche 


SERVES 4 

Hard cider has been fermented, so it contains alcohol. 
It is a traditional ingredient in Normandy, 
France, but you can substitute dry white wine. 

1 whole chicken (about 4 pounds), cut into 
8 pieces (each breast half cut in half 
crosswise), rinsed well and patted dry 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
1 tablespoon unsalted butter 


2 teaspoons olive oil 

4 small leeks (about 1 pound), white and 
pale-green parts only, cut crosswise into 
  pieces, rinsed well 


1 cup good-quality hard apple cider 

1 tablespoon coarsely chopped fresh 
thyme leaves 


1/2 cup Creme Fraiche (recipe follows; 
or use store-bought) 


1 tablespoon finely chopped fresh 
flat-leaf parsley 


1. Season chicken with salt and pepper. Melt butter 
with the oil in a large enameled cast-iron Dutch 
oven over medium-high heat until just bubbling. 
Add half the chicken pieces, skin sides down; cook, 
286 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


turning once, until golden, 2 to 3 minutes per side. 
Transfer chicken pieces to a plate; set aside. Repeat 
with remaining chicken pieces; add to plate. Remove 
pot from heat; let cool slightly. 

2. Return pot to medium-low heat, and add leeks. 
Cook, stirring frequently, until leeks begin to soften 
and are pale golden, about 3 minutes. Add hard 
cider and thyme. Move leeks to edges of pot, and 
add all the chicken pieces to pot, skin sides down. 
Arrange leeks over chicken. Cover, and cook 15 minutes 
(if liquid is bubbling rapidly, reduce heat to 
low). Turn chicken pieces, and cook until breasts 
are cooked through, about 5 minutes more. 
3. Transfer chicken breasts to a plate, and cover 
to keep warm. Adjust leeks so they are submerged 
in liquid. Cook, uncovered, until the remaining 
chicken pieces are tender and cooked through, 
about 10 minutes. 
4. Using a slotted spoon, transfer all of the chicken 
to a warm serving platter. Remove leeks from pot, and 
arrange the leeks around chicken. Cover with foil, and 
set aside. Return pot to medium heat. Cook, uncovered, 
until liquid has reduced by about half (to a scant 
2/3 cup), 8 to 10 minutes. Reduce heat to medium-low. 
Whisk in the creme fraiche and parsley. Ladle pan 
sauce over chicken and leeks. Serve immediately. 
creme fraiche 

MAKES ABOUT 2 CUPS 

Leftover creme fraiche makes a delicious accompaniment 
to fruit desserts. 

2 cups heavy cream 

2 tablespoons low-fat buttermilk 

Stir together cream and buttermilk in a medium 
bowl. Let stand at room temperature, partially covered, 
until thick, about 12 hours. Stir; cover, and refrigerate 
until ready to use, up to 2 weeks. 







lemon-thyme chicken paillards 

SERVES 6 

6 boneless, skinless chicken breast halves 
(about 3 pounds total) 


6 garlic cloves, halved lengthwise 
3 lemons, 2 halved crosswise, 1 cut into wedges 


6 sprigs fresh thyme 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil 
Arugula Salad (recipe follows) 


1. Lay a chicken breast on parchment paper. Starting 
on 1 long side, cut horizontally into breast but 
not completely through. Open cut breast like a 
book. Top with another sheet of parchment. Flatten 
to an even thickness, about 1/3 inch thick. Repeat 
with remaining breasts. 
2. Rub both sides of each breast with garlic; transfer 
chicken and garlic to a large resealable plastic 
bag. Squeeze 2 lemon halves over chicken; add rinds 
to bag. Thinly slice remaining lemon halves crosswise. 
Top each breast with a lemon slice and thyme 
sprig; season with pepper. Drizzle chicken with oil. 
Marinate in the refrigerator, flipping occasionally, 
at least 2 hours (up to overnight). 
3. Preheat a grill or grill pan to high. Discard marinade, 
lemon, and thyme. Season chicken with salt 
and pepper. Grill, flipping once, until cooked 
through, 2 minutes per side. Serve chicken warm, 
at room temperature, or cold. Top each breast with 
salad, dividing evenly; serve with lemon wedges. 






arugula salad 

SERVES 6 

1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice 

1/4 teaspoon coarse salt 
Pinch of freshly ground pepper 


2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
2 bunches baby arugula (about 6 cups) 


1 head radicchio, torn into pieces 
(about 3 cups) 


2 cups mache (about 1 ounce) or 2 endives, 
leaves separated 


1 cup grape tomatoes, thinly sliced 

POULTRY 287 


1. Whisk lemon juice, salt, and pepper in a small 
bowl. Gradually add oil, whisking constantly until 
emulsified 
2. To serve, toss arugula, radicchio, mache, and 
tomatoes in a large, chilled bowl with just enough 
dressing to lightly coat. 







barbecued chicken wings 

SERVES 12 

You can bake the chicken wings a day ahead and 
store them, covered, in the refrigerator; bring 
them to room temperature before grilling. 

24 whole chicken wings 

3 tablespoons olive oil 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

Pierre's Barbecue Sauce (page 272) 

1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Divide wings between 
2 rimmed baking sheets. Drizzle each sheet with 41/2 
teaspoons oil. Season each with 1/2 teaspoon salt and 
a pinch of pepper; toss to combine. Bake until 
cooked through, about 30 minutes. 
2. Preheat a grill to medium-high (if you are using 
a charcoal grill, coals are ready when you can hold 
your hand 5 inches above grill for just 3 to 4 seconds). 
Brush wings with barbecue sauce. Grill, turning 
and brushing with sauce occasionally, until 
heated through and marked by grill, 6 to 7 minutes. 
Serve immediately. 






curried chicken with 
toasted almonds 

SERVES 8 

14 boneless, skinless chicken thighs (about
33/4 pounds), cut into   pieces 


Coarse salt 

3 tablespoons plus 2 teaspoons extra-virgin 
olive oil 

2 tablespoons plus 2 teaspoons curry powder 
1 teaspoon cumin seeds 

1 bay leaf 
1 small cinnamon stick 


2 large garlic cloves, minced 
2 tablespoons finely chopped peeled fresh 
ginger 
1 small yellow onion, finely chopped 
11/4 cups heavy cream 
2 cups homemade or low-sodium store-
bought chicken or vegetable stock 
2 Granny Smith apples, cored, quartered 
1/2 teaspoon finely grated lime zest, plus 
2 tablespoons and 2 teaspoons fresh lime 
juice (from about 2 limes) 

1/4 cup finely chopped fresh mint, plus sprigs 
for garnish 
Three-Grain Pilaf (recipe follows) 


1/2 cup sliced blanched almonds, toasted 

1. Season chicken with salt. Heat 3 tablespoons oil 
in a Dutch oven over medium-high heat. Brown 
chicken in batches (so as not to crowd pot), turning 
once, 2 to 3 minutes per side. Transfer cooked 
chicken to a plate as you work. 
2. Reduce heat to low. Heat remaining 2 teaspoons 
oil in pot. Add spices, bay leaf, cinnamon stick, garlic, 
ginger, and onion. Cook, stirring often, until fragrant, 
about 5 minutes. Add chicken and juices, and 
stir to coat with spice mixture. 
3. Raise heat to medium. Stir in cream, scraping 
bottom with a wooden spoon. Bring to a simmer. 
Add stock; return to a simmer. Reduce heat to low. 
Cook, partially covered, until chicken is tender, 30 
to 35 minutes. Season with salt. 
288 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


4. Just before serving, grate apples into a bowl 
using the large holes of a box grater. Stir in zest, 
lime juice, and mint. 
5. Spoon curried chicken mixture over pilaf in bowls. 
Top with about 2 tablespoons apple-mint mixture. 
Sprinkle with almonds; garnish with mint sprigs. 






three-grain pilaf 

SERVES 8 

2 tablespoons unsalted butter 
1 small onion, finely chopped 


11/2 cups jasmine rice, rinsed 
1/2 cup red rice, rinsed 

1 cup quinoa, rinsed 

3/4 teaspoon coarse salt 
Melt butter in a medium saucepan over medium 
heat. Add onion; cook, stirring occasionally, until 
onion is soft and pale gold, 8 to 10 minutes. Stir in 
4 cups water, the grains, and salt. Raise heat to 
high; bring to a boil. Reduce heat to low, and stir. 
Cover, and cook until grains are tender, 20 to 25 
minutes. Remove from heat, and let stand, covered, 
10 minutes. Fluff with a fork, and serve. 







roasted quartered chicken 
and shallots 

SERVES 4 

If you can't find precut chicken quarters, ask your 
butcher to quarter a 5-pound chicken and remove 
the backbone. 

1 tablespoon unsalted butter, softened 

4 pounds chicken quarters, skin on 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


4 large shallots, peeled and halved 
lengthwise 


1. Preheat the oven to 450 degrees  F. Lightly brush a 
rimmed baking sheet and the chicken pieces with 
butter. Lay chicken, skin side up, on sheet; season 
with 2 teaspoons salt and the pepper. 
2. Roast chicken 20 minutes. Remove from oven. 
Carefully arrange shallots, cut side down, around 
chicken; season shallots with salt and pepper. Return 
to oven. Continue roasting, basting chicken 
occasionally with pan juices, until an instant-read 
thermometer inserted into thickest part of the thigh 
(avoiding bone) registers 165 degrees  F and shallots are 
tender and caramelized, about 20 minutes more. 
Transfer to a platter; loosely tent with foil. Let stand 
10 minutes before serving. 







moroccan b'steeya 

SERVES 6 TO 8 

Season the chicken a day ahead so it has time to 
absorb the flavors. 

1 whole roaster chicken (about 4 pounds), 
cut into 8 pieces 


Coarse salt 

1 medium onion, finely chopped 
3 garlic cloves, minced 


1/8 teaspoon crumbled saffron 
1/2 teaspoon ground ginger 


11/2 teaspoons ground cinnamon, plus 
more for sprinkling 

1 cup coarsely chopped fresh flat-leaf 
parsley 


1/2 cup coarsely chopped fresh cilantro 

1/4 cup unsalted butter, plus 1/2 cup melted 
(11/2 sticks total) 


6 large eggs, lightly beaten 

1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice 
Freshly ground pepper 


13/4 cups blanched whole almonds, toasted 
and coarsely chopped 

3 tablespoons confectioners' sugar, plus 
more for sprinkling 


1/4 cup orange-flower water 

1 package (17 ounces) store-bought 
phyllo dough 


1. Put the chicken and 1/3 cup salt in a medium bowl; 
toss to coat. Refrigerate 1 hour. Rinse the chicken 
with cold water; pat dry. Mix the chicken, onion, garlic, 
saffron, ginger, 1 teaspoon cinnamon, 1/2 cup 
parsley, and 1/4 cup cilantro in a large bowl; cover, 
and refrigerate overnight. 
POULTRY 289 


2. Transfer the chicken mixture to a medium heavy 
pot. Add enough water to cover (about 4 cups). 
Bring to a boil; reduce heat to medium. Add 1/4 cup 
butter; cover, and simmer until chicken is falling 
off the bone, 1 to 11/2 hours, adding water to cover if 
necessary. Transfer the chicken to a plate; let cool. 
Reserve the poaching liquid. Remove the meat from 
the bones and shred; discard the skin and bones. 
Set the chicken aside. 
3. Bring the reserved poaching liquid to a boil over 
high heat; cook until reduced to 3/4 cup. Reduce heat 
to medium-high. Slowly add the eggs; whisk constantly 
until the mixture is almost set, 4 to 6 minutes. 
Stir in the remaining 1/2 cup parsley, 1/4 cup 
cilantro, and the lemon juice. Season with salt and 
pepper; set aside. 
4. Stir together the almonds, sugar, and remaining 
1/2 teaspoon cinnamon in a small bowl; set aside. 
5. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Brush a 1  paella 
or pizza pan with 2 tablespoons melted butter. Stir 
together the remaining melted butter and the orange-
flower water in a small bowl. Assemble the 
b'steeya: Brush a sheet of phyllo with butter mixture. 
Put it in the pan, leaving a 4-inch overhang. 
Repeat, buttering and adding 7 more sheets of 
phyllo, overlapping the layers and fanning out 
around the pan. (Keep unbuttered phyllo covered 
with plastic wrap and a damp kitchen towel.) 
6. Arrange the chicken mixture evenly over the 
dough. Pour in the egg mixture. Top with 5 layers 
phyllo brushed with butter mixture. Sprinkle evenly 
with almond mixture. Fold up the edges of the 
phyllo to enclose. Top with 5 layers phyllo brushed 
with butter mixture; tuck the edges inside the pan. 
Slightly crinkle 2 unbuttered layers phyllo over top. 
Bake until golden brown, 35 to 40 minutes. Sprinkle 
with sugar and cinnamon. 
TURKEY 








perfect roast turkey 

SERVES 12 TO 14 

We brined our turkey for 24 hours, so leave plenty 
of time for this recipe. If you don't brine yours, 
skip steps 1 and 2. The USDA recommends cooking 
the turkey until the thickest part of the thigh 
registers 180 degrees F. For a moister bird, we cooked 
ours to 165 degrees F; it continues to cook outside the 
oven as it rests. 

3 cups coarse salt, plus more for seasoning 

5 cups sugar 
2 medium onions, coarsely chopped 


2 medium leeks, white and pale-green parts 
only, rinsed and coarsely chopped 

2 carrots, peeled and coarsely chopped 

2 celery stalks, coarsely chopped 
2 dried bay leaves 


3 sprigs fresh thyme 
3 sprigs fresh flat-leaf parsley 


2 teaspoons whole black peppercorns, 
plus freshly ground pepper 


1 fresh whole turkey (18 to 20 pounds), 
rinsed and patted dry, giblets and neck 
reserved for Gravy (recipe follows) 


1/2 cup (1 stick) unsalted butter, melted, 
plus 1/4 cup unsalted butter, softened 


11/2 cups dry white wine, such as Sauvignon 
Blanc 

Chestnut Stuffing (recipe follows) 

Crab apples, fresh rosemary sprigs, and 
fresh sage, for garnish (optional) 

1. Put the salt, sugar, onions, leeks, carrots, celery, 
bay leaves, thyme, parsley, peppercorns, and 10 cups 
water in a large stockpot. Bring to a boil, stirring 
until the salt and sugar have dissolved. Remove 
from heat; let the brine cool completely. 
2. Add the turkey, breast first, to the brine. Cover; 
refrigerate 24 hours. Remove from the brine; pat dry 
with paper towels. Let stand at room temperature 
2 hours. 
290 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


3. Preheat the oven to 425 degrees F, with a rack in the lowest 
position. Stir together the melted butter and 
wine in a medium bowl. Fold a very large piece of 
cheesecloth into quarters so it is large enough to 
cover the breast and halfway down the sides of the 
turkey. Immerse the cloth in the butter mixture; let 
soak while you prepare the turkey. 
4. Place the turkey, breast side up, on a rack set in 
a roasting pan. Fold the wing tips under the turkey. 
Sprinkle 1 teaspoon each salt and pepper inside the 
turkey. Loosely fill the body and neck cavities with 
stuffing. Tie the legs together with kitchen twine. 
Fold the neck flap under; secure with toothpicks. 
Rub the turkey all over with softened butter; season 
with salt and pepper. 
5. Remove the cheesecloth from the butter mixture, 
squeezing gently into a bowl. Reserve the butter 
mixture for brushing. Lay the cheesecloth over the 
turkey. Place the turkey, legs first, in the oven. Roast 
30 minutes. Brush the cheesecloth and exposed 
turkey with butter mixture. Reduce temperature to 
350 degrees F. Roast, brushing every 30 minutes, 21/2 hours 
more; cover with foil if browning too quickly. If making 
gravy, add the giblets and neck to the pan 11/2 
hours after reducing the temperature; roast 30 minutes, 
and reserve. 
6. Discard the cheesecloth; rotate the pan. Baste 
the turkey with the pan juices. Roast, rotating the 
pan halfway through, until the skin is golden brown 
and an instant-read thermometer inserted into the 
thickest part of the thigh registers 180 degrees F and stuffing 
reaches 165 degrees F, about 1 hour. Transfer to a platter. 
Set the pan with drippings aside for gravy. Let 
the turkey stand at room temperature at least 30 
minutes. Garnish, if desired. 






gravy 

MAKES ABOUT 4 CUPS 

Add the giblets and neck to the pan with the 
turkey 11/2 hours after the oven temperature is 
reduced to 350 degrees F in step 5 (recipe above). 

Giblets and neck from turkey 

5 whole black peppercorns 
3 sprigs fresh thyme 


3 sprigs fresh flat-leaf parsley 
1 sprig fresh rosemary 


1 fresh or dried bay leaf 
3 tablespoons unsalted butter 


2 celery stalks, coarsely chopped 
1 small carrot, coarsely chopped 


1 leek, white and pale-green parts only, 
rinsed and coarsely chopped 


1 medium onion, coarsely chopped 

3/4 cup dry white wine or turkey stock 
3 tablespoons all-purpose flour 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


1. Trim the fat and membranes from the giblets. 
Rinse the giblets; pat dry. Add the giblets and neck 
to the pan with the turkey. Roast until browned, 
about 30 minutes. Set aside. 
2. Make a bouquet garni: Tie the peppercorns, 
thyme, parsley, rosemary, and bay leaf in a square 
of cheesecloth. Set aside. 
3. Make the stock: Melt the butter in a medium 
saucepan over medium-high heat. Add the vegetables. 
Cook, stirring, until beginning to brown, 7 to 
10 minutes. 
4. Reduce heat to medium; add the giblets, neck, 
bouquet garni, and 1 quart water. Cover, and bring 
to boil. Reduce heat to medium-low, and cook, uncovered, 
until reduced to about 3 cups, 50 to 60 minutes. 
Pour the mixture through a fine sieve into a 
clean medium saucepan. Keep the stock warm over 
medium-low heat. Roughly chop the giblets; shred 
the meat from the neck with a fork. Set aside. Discard 
the other solids. 
5. Transfer the turkey to a large platter. Reserve 3 
tablespoons drippings from pan. Pour the remain-
POULTRY 291 


  

292 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


ing drippings into a gravy separator; let stand until 
separated, about 10 minutes. Discard the fat. 

6. Deglaze the roasting pan: Place the roasting pan 
over 2 burners. Add the wine; bring to a boil, stirring 
with a wooden spoon to loosen any browned bits on 
the bottom of the pan. Reserve the deglazed liquid. 
7. Make the gravy: Put the reserved 3 tablespoons 
pan drippings from the turkey in a medium 
saucepan; cook over medium heat until hot. Add 
the flour, whisking vigorously to combine. Cook, 
whisking constantly, until fragrant and deep golden 
brown, about 9 minutes. Whisking vigorously, 
slowly add the hot stock. Bring to a boil. Reduce 
heat to a gentle simmer. 
8. Stir in the reserved deglazed liquid and separated 
pan juices. Add the giblets and neck meat. 
Season with salt and pepper. Simmer, stirring occasionally, 
until the gravy has thickened to the consistency 
of heavy cream, about 20 minutes. Pour 
through a fine sieve into a saucepan; discard the 
solids. Keep the gravy warm over low heat. Season 
with salt and pepper. 






chestnut stuffing 

SERVES 10 TO 12 

You will need to dry the bread cubes overnight; 
transfer them to resealable plastic bags until 
you're ready to make the stuffing, up to 1 day more. 

2 loaves good-quality white bread, cut into 
  cubes (about 20 cups) 


11/2 pounds (4 cups) fresh chestnuts, 
scored with an X 

3/4 cup (11/2 sticks) unsalted butter 
4 small onions, peeled and cut 
into   dice (about 3 cups) 


1 bunch celery, cut into   dice


3 tablespoons finely chopped fresh sage 

5 cups homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock 


1 tablespoon coarse salt 

3 cups coarsely chopped fresh flat- 
leaf parsley 


Freshly ground pepper 

1. Spread the bread cubes in single layers on baking 
sheets. Set aside to dry out at room temperature, 
uncovered, overnight. 
2. Bring a medium saucepan of water to a boil. Add 
the chestnuts; cook until soft, about 20 minutes. 
Drain; let cool slightly. Peel and quarter the chestnuts; 
set aside. Peeled chestnuts can be refrigerated 
in an airtight container 2 to 3 days. 
3. Melt the butter in a large skillet over medium 
heat. Add the onions and celery; cook, stirring, until 
the onions are translucent, about 10 minutes. Add 
the sage; cook 3 minutes. Stir in 1/2 cup stock; cook 
until reduced by half, about 5 minutes. 
4. Transfer the onion mixture to a large bowl. Add 
the remaining 41/2 cups stock, the chestnuts, bread, 
salt, and parsley; season with pepper. Toss to combine. 
If not stuffing turkey, transfer to a buttered 
17 x 1  baking dish. Cover; bake at 350 degrees F for 
25 minutes. Uncover; bake until hot and golden 
brown, 30 minutes more. 






thanksgiving leftovers 
shepherd's pie 


SERVES 4 TO 6 

To bake individual pies, use 6 10-ounce ramekins, 
and reduce cooking time to 20 to 30 minutes. 

3 cups cooked stuffing 

1 cup cranberry sauce, plus more for 
topping (optional) 


1 pound sliced cooked turkey 

10 ounces glazed carrots (or another leftover 
vegetable) 


4 to 6 tablespoons gravy 
3 to 4 cups mashed potatoes 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. In a 9- to 10-inch pie 
plate, mound the stuffing on the bottom; layer with 
the cranberry sauce, turkey, and carrots. Drizzle 
with the gravy; spread the potatoes over the surface 
to the sides of the dish. Top with more cranberry 
sauce, if desired. 
2. Place the pie on a baking sheet, and bake until 
heated through and the potatoes are golden, 35 to 
40 minutes. Let cool slightly. 
POULTRY 293 








turkey meatloaf 

SERVES 6 

4 slices white bread, crusts trimmed, 
torn into pieces 
8 small sage leaves 
11/2 pounds ground lean turkey 
1 large yellow onion, cut into eighths 
1 stalk celery, cut into   pieces 
1/2 teaspoon dried thyme 
1 large whole egg, lightly beaten 
2 tablespoons tomato paste 
4 teaspoons Dijon mustard 
11/4 teaspoons Worcestershire sauce 

3/4 teaspoon coarse salt 
Freshly ground black pepper 
1 large egg white 
Cheater's Gravy, (recipe follows) 
Garlic Mashed Potatoes, (recipe follows) 


1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F, with the rack in the 
center. Place the bread and sage leaves in the bowl 
of a food processor; pulse to form fine crumbs. Transfer 
to a medium bowl, and add the ground turkey. 
2. Place the onion and celery in the bowl of the food 
processor; pulse until finely chopped. Add to the 
turkey mixture, using your hands to combine. Add 
the thyme, whole egg, 1 tablespoon tomato paste, 
mustard, 1 teaspoon Worcestershire, and salt; 
season with pepper. Combine well. Place in a 
9 x 5 x 2  nonstick loaf pan. 
3. In a small bowl, combine the egg white with the 
remaining tablespoon tomato paste and 1/4 teaspoon 
Worcestershire, whisking with a fork until smooth. 
Spoon the mixture over the meatloaf; spread evenly. 
4. Transfer the pan to the oven; place a baking sheet 
on the lower rack to catch the drippings. Cook until 
a meat thermometer inserted in the center of the 
meatloaf registers 180 degrees F, about 11/4 hours. Remove 
from the oven; let rest 15 minutes, covered with foil. 
5. To serve, cut the meatloaf into 12 slices, and divide 
evenly among 6 serving plates. Serve immediately 
with hot gravy and mashed potatoes. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 200 CALORIES, 3 G FAT, 

86 MG CHOLESTEROL, 13 G CARBOHYDRATE, 451 MG 

SODIUM, 31 G PROTEIN, 1 G FIBER 







cheater's gravy 

MAKES ABOUT 1 CUP; SERVES 6 

We serve this flavorful gravy over meatloaf and 
mashed potatoes, but it is equally good with other 
classic comfort foods, such as ham and biscuits. 

1 cup homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock, skimmed of fat 


1 teaspoon cornstarch 

1 tablespoon cold water 
1 tablespoon chopped fresh flat-leaf parsley 

1. In a small saucepan, bring the chicken stock to 
a boil over high heat. Reduce heat to medium, and 
simmer until the stock is reduced by half, about 
10 minutes. 
2. Meanwhile, in a small bowl, whisk together the 
cornstarch and the water with a fork until smooth; 
whisk into the simmering stock. Raise heat; return 
to a full boil. Boil 30 seconds. Remove from heat, 
and stir in the parsley. Serve. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 5 CALORIES, 0 G FAT, 

0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 1 G CARBOHYDRATE, 80 MG SODIUM, 

0 G PROTEIN, 0 G FIBER 







garlic mashed potatoes 

SERVES 6 

Garlic gives the dish a mellow flavor. 

1 pound red potatoes, peeled and cut 
into eighths 


1 pound russet potatoes, peeled and 
cut into 1  pieces 


5 garlic cloves 

3/4 cup nonfat milk 
2 tablespoons unsalted butter 
3/4 teaspoon coarse salt 
Freshly ground pepper 
1. In a medium saucepan, combine the potatoes 
and whole garlic; add enough cold water to cover 
by about 2 inches. Bring to a boil over high heat. 
Reduce heat to a simmer, and cook until the potatoes 
are easily pierced with a fork, about 15 minutes. 
Drain the potatoes, and set aside in a warm place. 
294 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


2. Meanwhile, in the same saucepan, combine the 
milk, butter, and salt; season with pepper. Heat over 
low until the butter has melted and the milk is warm 
to the touch. Pass the potatoes and garlic through 
a ricer or food mill into saucepan; stir gently to combine. 
Serve immediately. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 178 CALORIES, 4 G FAT, 

11 MG CHOLESTEROL, 33 G CARBOHYDRATE, 259 MG 

SODIUM, 4 G PROTEIN, 3 G FIBER 







moussaka 

SERVES 6 

Moussaka may be assembled 1 day in advance 
and refrigerated; bake for an additional 15 to 20 
minutes, or until the center is hot. 

2 cups plain nonfat yogurt 

1 pound ground turkey 
1 yellow onion, cut into   dice 


1 garlic clove, minced 
1 teaspoon ground cinnamon 


1 teaspoon coarse salt, plus more 
for eggplant 


1/4 teaspoon ground nutmeg 
1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 


1 28-ounce can whole peeled tomatoes, 
coarsely chopped 


1/4 cup tomato paste 

1/4 cup chopped fresh oregano 
1/2 cup chopped fresh flat-leaf parsley 


2 medium eggplants (about 2 pounds) 
Olive oil cooking spray 


1/4 cup (1 ounce) grated Parmesan cheese 
1 large egg plus 1 large egg white 


1. Drain the yogurt in a cheesecloth-lined sieve 
until thickened, 2 hours or overnight. 
2. Heat the turkey in a medium saucepan over 
medium; cook until browned, about 6 minutes. 
Using a slotted spoon, transfer to a medium bowl. 
Add the onion, garlic, cinnamon, salt, nutmeg, and 
pepper to the saucepan; cook until the onion is 
translucent, about 10 minutes. Return the turkey to 
the saucepan; add the tomatoes, tomato paste, and 
oregano. Bring to a boil; reduce heat, and simmer 
until the sauce has thickened, about 1 hour. Remove 
from heat; stir in the chopped parsley. Set aside. 

3. Heat the broiler. While the sauce cooks, cut the 
eggplants into   slices. Sprinkle with salt on 
both sides. Place in a colander over a bowl; let stand 
1 hour to drain. Discard the liquid; rinse each slice 
under cold running water to remove all salt and 
juice. Place the slices on several layers of paper towels; 
press out water. Lay the dry slices on a clean 
baking sheet; coat with olive oil spray; broil until 
browned, about 2 minutes. Turn; coat with olive oil 
spray; broil until browned, about 2 minutes more. 
Repeat until all the eggplant slices have been 
broiled; set the cooked eggplant aside. 
4. Place the drained yogurt in a small bowl. Add the 
Parmesan and eggs. Whisk together briskly with a 
fork; set aside. 
5. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Assemble the moussaka: 
Place a layer of eggplant on the bottom of an 
8 x 8-inch baking pan. Cover with half the turkey 
sauce. Place another eggplant layer, then the remaining 
turkey sauce. Add a final eggplant layer; 
cover with reserved yogurt mixture. Bake until the 
mixture is bubbling and the top starts to brown, 
about 30 minutes. Transfer to a heatproof surface; 
let sit until the moussaka cools slightly and firms, 
about 10 minutes. Cut into squares; serve. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 266 CALORIES, 9 G FAT, 
102 MG CHOLESTEROL, 23 G CARBOHYDRATE, 510 MG 
SODIUM, 25 G PROTEIN, 3 G FIBER 

POULTRY 295 








spice-cured turkey 

SERVES 12 TO 14 

It may seem like a bit of trouble to brine the 
turkey, but it is well worth it: This is the best 
turkey we've ever tasted. If you don't have a 
stockpot large enough to hold the turkey, you can 
use a new plastic tub instead. It is helpful to have 
an extra refrigerator to brine the turkey, as it 
takes up a lot of space. 

for the brine 

4 cups coarse salt 
5 cups sugar 


2 carrots, peeled and cut into   pieces 
2 stalks celery, cut into   pieces 


2 onions, cut into   pieces 
2 leeks, cut into   pieces and cleaned 
of all sand 
3 bay leaves 


1 head of garlic, cut in half crosswise 
2 tablespoons whole black peppercorns 


1 tablespoon ground cumin 
2 teaspoons crushed red pepper flakes 


1 teaspoon cloves 
2 teaspoons whole allspice 


8 cups water 

for the turkey and gravy 

1 18 to 20-pound organic turkey 

Apple-Chestnut Stuffing 
(recipe follows) 


Spice Butter, softened 
(recipe follows) 


1/2 cup apple cider 

3 tablespoons all-purpose flour 

3 cups homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock 


1. In a large stockpot, combine the salt, sugar, carrots, 
celery, onions, leeks, bay leaves, garlic, peppercorns, 
cumin, red pepper flakes, cloves, and 
allspice. Add the water, and bring to a boil. Remove 
from heat. The brine must cool completely before 
the turkey is soaked in it: It can be made 1 day ahead 
or chilled over an ice bath. 
2. Rinse the turkey under cold water; pat dry. Place 
in a stockpot, breast side down. Add the brine and 
enough water to cover. Cover the stockpot, and refrigerate 
overnight. Remove the turkey from the 
brine; drain. 
3. Preheat the oven to 425 degrees F. Fill the cavities with 
stuffing, being careful not to pack too tightly. Secure 
the skin over the neck cavity with toothpicks 
or skewers, and tie the legs together with kitchen 
twine. Rub the turkey generously with spice butter, 
and place on a rack in a roasting pan. 
4. Place in the oven, and roast 30 minutes. Baste, 
rotate the pan, and reduce oven temperature to 
350 degrees  F. Continue basting every 30 to 45 minutes, 
until the temperature taken in the thickest part of 
the thigh registers 180 degrees F, 31/2 to 4 hours. Once the 
turkey is well browned, cover with foil, in sections, 
if necessary to prevent overbrowning. Remove the 
foil for last 30 to 60 minutes, to crisp the skin. Allow 
the turkey to rest 30 minutes before carving. While 
the turkey is resting, remove the stuffing. 
5. To make the gravy, pour the liquid from the roasting 
pan into a gravy skimmer; set aside. Place the 
roasting pan on the stove over medium-high heat; 
deglaze with 1/2 cup apple cider, using a wooden 
spoon to scrape up bits stuck to the pan. Set aside. 
6. In a small saucepan, combine 3 tablespoons reserved 
fat from the pan and the flour; cook 3 to 4 
minutes, until browned. Add the reserved apple-
cider mixture along with the stock and any separated 
juices from the pan. Cook over medium heat 
until thickened. Serve with the turkey. 






apple-chestnut stuffing 

SERVES 12 TO 14 

To save time, you can complete the first three 
steps and chop onion and celery the day before. 
If you use shelled chestnuts, chop, then proceed 
with step 2. 

2 cups chestnuts (12 ounces in the shells, 
8 ounces shelled) 


1 loaf rustic Italian or French bread 
(about 1 pound) 


2 cups prunes, coarsely chopped (12 ounces) 
1 cup apple cider 

296 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


3 tablespoons unsalted butter, plus more for 
baking dish 

1 large red onion, finely chopped 

2 celery stalks, cut into   dice 

2 green apples, cored, cut into   dice 
2 large eggs, lightly beaten 


1/2 cup heavy cream 
3 tablespoons finely chopped fresh sage 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Using a chestnut knife 
or a small paring knife, make an incision about 1/8 
inch deep through the shell and into the flesh of the 
chestnut almost all the way around the circumference 
of the nut. Transfer to a chestnut pan or 
rimmed baking pan. Roast in the oven until the 
chestnuts are tender, about 35 minutes. Turn the 
oven off. Leaving the pan with the chestnuts in 
the oven, remove several at a time. Working quickly, 
place 1 chestnut in a towel, and, holding both, peel 
the chestnut while still hot. Remove and discard the 
shells and inner skin; coarsely chop, and set aside. 
2. Remove crusts from the bread, and set aside. Cut 
the bread into   cubes. Place in a single layer 
on two baking sheets, and toast in the oven until 
dry, 5 to 7 minutes. Set aside to cool. Place the reserved 
crusts in the bowl of a food processor, and 
pulse until coarse crumbs are formed. 
3. Place the prunes and apple cider in a small 
saucepan, and bring to a boil over medium-high 
heat. Reduce to a simmer, and cook until all liquid 
has been absorbed, 20 to 25 minutes. Set aside. 
4. Melt the butter in a large skillet over medium 
heat, and add the chestnuts, red onion, half the celery, 
and half the apples. Cook until onion is translucent, 
about 7 minutes. Set aside to cool. 
5. In a large bowl, combine the bread cubes and 
crumbs, prune mixture, chestnut mixture, remaining 
celery, apples, eggs, heavy cream, and sage. Stir 
to combine. The juices from the brine will season 
the stuffing; stir before serving. 
6. The stuffing can be baked in turkey until its temperature 
reaches 165 degrees F. Excess stuffing can be seasoned 
with salt and pepper and baked in a buttered 
baking dish, covered, at 350 degrees F for 30 minutes and 
then uncovered for an additional 10 minutes. 
spice butter 

MAKES 1 CUP 

1 cup (2 sticks) unsalted butter, softened 

2 teaspoons coarse salt 
1 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper 


1 teaspoon dried thyme 
1 teaspoon ground cumin 


1 teaspoon garlic powder 
1 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes 


1/4 teaspoon ground allspice 
1/4 teaspoon ground cloves 


1/4 teaspoon ground nutmeg 

Combine the butter, salt, pepper, thyme, cumin, 
garlic powder, pepper flakes, allspice, cloves, and 
nutmeg in a bowl. Beat on medium speed with an 
electric mixer or by hand until thoroughly combined. 
Refrigerate until ready to use, for up to 4 days. 







tuscan roast turkey breast 

SERVES 10 TO 12 

1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil 

1/4 cup fresh flat-leaf parsley, coarsely 
chopped 


3 tablespoons coarsely chopped fresh 
rosemary, plus 1 teaspoon finely chopped, 
plus 5 sprigs for roasting 

2 tablespoons coarsely chopped fresh sage, 
plus 5 sprigs for roasting 

2 tablespoons finely grated orange zest 

1 tablespoon fennel seeds, coarsely 
chopped 


1 dried chile, crumbled 
1 garlic clove, minced 


1 turkey breast (about 7 pounds), deboned, 
trimmed, and butterflied 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
8 ounces pancetta or bacon, thinly sliced 


1 cup black seedless grapes (optional) 
1/2 cup dry white wine 


2 cups homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought turkey or chicken stock 


Farro, Orange, and Pine Nut Dressing, for 
serving (page 377) 

POULTRY 297 


1. Stir 3 tablespoons oil, parsley, coarsely chopped 
rosemary, chopped sage, zest, fennel seeds, chile, 
and garlic in a bowl. Rub all over turkey, and season 
with salt and pepper. Place in a shallow, nonreactive 
baking pan; cover. Refrigerate at least 4 
hours (or overnight). 
2. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees  F. Let turkey stand at 
room temperature 30 minutes. Put herb sprigs into 
pan. Roll up turkey. Cover evenly with pancetta, and 
tie with kitchen twine; return to pan. Drizzle with 
remaining tablespoon oil; season with pepper. 
Roast until an instant-read thermometer inserted 
into the thickest part of the turkey registers 160 degrees F, 
about 11/2 hours. Add grapes to pan if desired during 
last 20 minutes. Transfer turkey to a cutting 
board; let rest 20 minutes. 
3. Transfer pan juices to a bowl, and reserve for another 
use. Heat pan on top of stove over medium 
heat. Add wine, and cook, stirring, until reduced by 
half. Stir in stock, and bring to a boil. Reduce heat, 
and simmer until slightly thickened. Stir in finely 
chopped rosemary, and season with salt and pepper. 
4. Slice turkey; transfer to a platter. Serve with 
herbed pan sauce and dressing. 






grilled chile-citrus 
turkey breast 

SERVES 8 

For indirect cooking on a charcoal grill, rake hot 
coals onto opposite sides before grilling; place a 
foil pan in the center to catch drippings. Set the 
turkey on the grates over the pan; grill, covered 
but with the vents partially opened. 

12 dried cascabel chiles (about 2 ounces) or 
5 ancho chiles (dried poblanos) 


Juice of 2 oranges 

Juice of 1 lime 
5 garlic cloves 


1 small white onion, chopped 
1 teaspoon coarse salt 


1 bone-in turkey breast (4 to 6 pounds) 

24 corn tortillas (6 inches each), warmed 
for serving 


1. Toast chiles in a dry skillet over medium heat, 
turning occasionally, until slightly softened and pliable, 
about 5 minutes. Remove seeds and ribs. Place 
chiles in a small bowl, and cover with boiling water. 
Let stand 15 minutes. 
2. Using a slotted spoon, transfer chiles to a 
blender. Add orange and lime juices, garlic, onion, 
and salt; blend until smooth. Transfer 3/4 cup sauce 
to a bowl and refrigerate, covered. 
3. Rub turkey with remaining cup sauce. Transfer 
to a plate, and cover with plastic wrap. Marinate in 
refrigerator at least 2 hours (up to 12 hours). 
4. Preheat grill to medium (if you are using a charcoal 
grill, coals are ready when you can hold your 
hand 5 inches above grill for just 5 to 6 seconds). 
Remove turkey from refrigerator; let stand at room 
temperature 30 minutes. 
5. Grill, covered, over indirect heat until an instant-
read thermometer inserted into thickest part of 
breast registers 165 degrees F, 1 to 11/2 hours. (Alternatively, 
roast in a 400 degrees F oven for about 1 hour 20 minutes.) 
Transfer to a cutting board; let stand 15 minutes 
before slicing. Serve with warm tortillas and reserved 
sauce. 








roasted duck breasts 
with wild mushroom stuffing 
and red wine sauce 


SERVES 6 TO 8 

2 loaves day-old rustic white bread, 
crusts removed, cut into   cubes 
(about 12 cups) 


1/4 cup plus 3 tablespoons extra-virgin 
olive oil 


2 tablespoons unsalted butter, plus more 
for baking dish 


2 leeks, white and pale-green parts only, 
cut into   dice, rinsed well 


1/2 pound celery root, peeled and cut 
into   dice 


2 garlic cloves, minced 

12 ounces assorted wild and cultivated 
mushrooms (such as black trumpet, 
hedgehog, oyster, chanterelle, cremini, 
and button mushrooms), thinly sliced 


2 tablespoons finely chopped fresh thyme 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


11/4 cups homemade or low-sodium store-
bought chicken stock 

for the duck 

4 duck breast halves (each about 14 
ounces), cold 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

for the sauce 
1/2 cup dry red wine 
2 tablespoons port (optional) 
1/2 cup homemade or low-sodium store-
bought chicken stock 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

2 tablespoons cold unsalted butter, 
cut into   pieces 


1. Make the stuffing: Preheat the oven to 350 degrees  F. 
Bake the bread cubes in a single layer on a rimmed 
baking sheet until just golden, about 25 minutes. 
Let cool completely. Pulse in a food processor (in 
batches, if needed) until coarse crumbs form, about 
15 seconds; transfer to a bowl. Add 1/4 cup oil; toss 
well. Spread the bread crumb mixture on the baking 
sheet, and bake, stirring occasionally, until deep 
golden brown, about 15 minutes. Transfer to a large 
mixing bowl. 
2. Heat the remaining 3 tablespoons oil and 2 tablespoons 
butter in a large skillet over medium-low 
heat until the butter has melted. Add the leeks, celery 
root, and garlic; cook, stirring occasionally, until 
the leeks are soft, about 15 minutes. Raise heat to 
medium. Stir in the mushrooms and thyme; season 
with salt and pepper. Cook, stirring occasionally, 
until the mushrooms are soft, about 10 minutes. Remove 
from heat. Stir the vegetable mixture into the 
bread crumb mixture; let cool completely. 
3. Prepare the duck: Place the duck breasts, skin 
sides up, on a cutting board. Using a sharp knife, 
score lines, 1/2 inch apart, in a cross-hatch pattern 
into the fat; cut almost all the way through, but do 
not cut into the flesh. Season both sides with salt 
and pepper. Cut 6 14-inch pieces of kitchen twine. 
Lay 3 pieces of twine about 2 inches apart on a cutting 
board. Place 1 duck breast half, skin side down, 
crosswise over the twine. Place about 1/2 cup stuffing 
on top of the duck. Top with another breast half, 
skin side up. Tie together tightly with the twine. Repeat 
with the remaining breasts. Stuffed duck can 
be refrigerated, covered, overnight. Bring to room 
temperature before cooking. 
4. Bake the remaining stuffing: Preheat the oven to 
375 degrees F. Butter an 8-inch-square baking dish; set aside. 
Stir together the remaining stuffing and 11/4 cups 
POULTRY 299 


stock in a large bowl. Transfer to the prepared dish. 
Bake until the top is crisp and pale golden brown but 
the center is still moist, about 30 minutes. 

5. Meanwhile, cook the duck: Heat a large skillet 
over medium heat. Add the duck breasts to the skillet. 
Cook, turning once, until golden brown, 5 to 7 
minutes per side. Transfer the breasts to a plate; 
pour the fat from the skillet into a heatproof container. 
Return the breasts to the skillet, and place 
it in the oven. Cook until an instant-read thermometer 
inserted into the thickest part of the meat 
registers 125 degrees F for rare, 25 to 30 minutes. Transfer 
to a plate; let rest in a warm place, loosely covered 
with foil, 15 minutes. Pour the fat from the skillet. 
6. Make the sauce: Lightly wipe out the skillet, and 
place it over medium-high heat. Add the wine; cook 
until reduced by half, about 5 minutes. Add the port, 
if desired, and the stock. Simmer until reduced by 
half, about 5 minutes. Add the accumulated juices 
from the duck to the skillet. Season with salt and 
pepper; whisk in the butter. Pour the sauce through 
a fine sieve into a gravy boat. To serve, slice the 
duck, and drizzle with sauce, with baked stuffing 
on the side. 
chinese duck with shiitake 
mushrooms and wide rice sticks 

SERVES 4 

You can purchase a whole roast duck at your 
local Chinese restaurant. Some varieties of noodles 
suggest soaking them in boiling water instead 
of cooking them; check your package 
instructions before preparing them. 


1 whole Chinese roast duck 

4 whole star anise 
1 cinnamon stick (about 4 inches) 


1 piece (3 inches) peeled fresh ginger, 
sliced 


6 large scallions, cut into   pieces 
41/2 teaspoons small dried shrimp (optional) 


41/2 teaspoons Asian fish sauce 
11/2 teaspoons sugar 


8 fresh shiitake mushrooms, stemmed, caps 
sliced if large, left whole if small 

2 cups mung bean sprouts 

4 heads baby bok choy 
101/2 ounces wide rice sticks 

1. Make the broth: Remove meat with skin from 
duck; keep legs intact. Cut meat into large chunks; 
remove excess fat, and discard. Set aside. Remove fat 
from bones; cut bones into large pieces. Put 6 cups 
water, the bones, star anise, cinnamon stick, ginger, 
about two-thirds of the scallions, dried shrimp, fish 
sauce, and sugar into a large pot. Bring to a simmer; 
skim foam from the surface. Cook, covered, 45 minutes. 
Pour through a fine sieve into another large pot; 
discard solids. Let broth stand 10 minutes; skim fat 
from the surface. Return to a simmer. 
2. Add mushrooms to broth, and cook until they 
are tender, about 5 minutes. Add duck meat and remaining 
scallions; cook until duck is heated 
through. Reduce heat to low, and cover. 
3. Bring a large pot of water to a boil. Add sprouts; 
cook until slightly softened, about 2 minutes. Using 
a slotted spoon, transfer to a plate. Add bok choy 
to pot, and cook until bright green and tender, about 
5 minutes. Transfer to a plate. 
300 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


4. Bring a large pot of water to a boil. Add noodles; 
cook according to package instructions, 6 to 8 minutes. 
Drain; rinse under cold running water. Set aside. 
5. Using a slotted spoon, remove duck meat; divide 
among 4 serving bowls. Divide noodles, sprouts, 
and bok choy among bowls. Ladle broth into bowls, 
dividing evenly. Serve immediately. 
roasted cornish hens with 
pomegranate-molasses glaze 

SERVES 4 

Pomegranate molasses is sold in many ethnic 
markets and health-food stores. 

1/3 cup pomegranate molasses 
1/3 cup extra-virgin olive oil 


1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 

2 Cornish hens (each 1 to 11/2 pounds), 
rinsed and patted dry 


2 onions, 1 thinly sliced and the other 
cut into 8 wedges 


4 garlic cloves, smashed 
Cooking spray, for the roasting rack 


1 lemon, cut into 8 wedges 
2 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1. In a small bowl, whisk together the pomegranate 
molasses, oil, and pepper. Place each hen in a 
large resealable plastic bag. Divide the marinade 
evenly between the bags; add the sliced onion and 
garlic. Seal the bags; turn to coat. Refrigerate at least 
4 hours or overnight, turning occasionally. 
2. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F, with the rack in the 
lower third. Line a shallow roasting pan or rimmed 
baking sheet with a roasting rack, and coat the rack 
with spray; set aside. 
3. Remove the hens from the plastic bags, letting 
excess marinade drip off. Place the hens on the rack, 
breast side up, and tuck the wing tips under the 
body. Fill each cavity with 4 onion and 4 lemon 
wedges; tie the legs with kitchen twine. Brush with 
butter; sprinkle with salt and pepper. 
4. Transfer to the oven, and roast until the hens are 
golden and cooked through, about 11/2 hours, rotating 
the pan every half-hour. If the skin starts to get 
too dark, cover loosely with foil. Remove from the 
oven; serve warm. 
cornish hens 
with lemon and herbs 


SERVES 4 

For more-generous portions, cook one hen per 
person. If you do, use two roasting pans, and double 
the other ingredients. 

2 Cornish hens (about 13/4 pounds each), 
room temperature, rinsed well and patted 
dry 

1 bunch fresh thyme (about 1/2 ounce), 
plus more for garnish 


2 lemons, halved, plus wedges for serving 
1/4 cup loosely packed fresh flat-leaf 
parsley leaves 
3 tablespoons unsalted butter 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1. Preheat the oven to 450 degrees F. Place hens in a roasting 
pan, breast sides up. Place 2 thyme sprigs and 
1 lemon half in cavity of each hen. Loosen skin from 
breast, and place remaining thyme and the parsley 
underneath. Squeeze remaining lemon halves 
over hens. Rub butter all over hens. Season generously 
with salt and pepper. 
2. Roast hens, rotating pan halfway through, until 
skin turns golden brown and an instant-read thermometer 
inserted into the thickest part of the thigh 
registers 180 degrees F, 45 to 50 minutes. Let stand 10 minutes. 
Cut hens in half lengthwise. Garnish with 
thyme sprigs, and serve with lemon wedges. 
POULTRY 301 


fish 


AND 

shellfish 



provencal seafood pie 

SERVES 4 TO 6 

2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

1/4 cup (1/2 stick) unsalted butter 

1 leek, white and pale-green parts only, 
washed well and finely chopped 


1 fennel bulb, cut into   slices 

2 garlic cloves, minced 

3/4 cup all-purpose flour, plus more 
for work surface 
2 cups Fumet (recipe follows) or 
store-bought fish stock 


3 canned whole peeled plum tomatoes, 
crushed 


1 lobster tail, shelled and cut into 
  pieces, shell reserved for 
Fumet (recipe follows) 


6 ounces large shrimp, peeled and 
deveined, shells reserved for Fumet 
(recipe follows) 


6 ounces scallops, tough muscles 
removed, halved 


6 ounces striped bass fillet, skinned 
and cut into 1  pieces 


6 ounces halibut fillet, skinned and 
cut into 1  pieces 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

3 tablespoons chopped fresh flat- 
leaf parsley 


1 package (14 ounces) frozen puff pastry 
(such as Dufour), thawed 


1 tablespoon heavy cream 

1 large egg yolk 
Aioli (recipe follows), for serving 


1. Heat the oil and butter in a medium saucepan 
over medium-high heat. Add the leek, fennel, and 
garlic; cook, stirring, until the vegetables are softened, 
about 6 minutes. Add the flour; cook, stirring, 
6 to 7 minutes. Whisk in the stock. Bring to a boil. 
Stir in the tomatoes. Reduce heat to medium-low. 
Add the lobster, shrimp, scallops, bass, and halibut; 
cook 5 minutes. Season with salt and pepper. Stir 
in the parsley. Let cool. 
2. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Roll out the dough on 
a lightly floured surface to a 10-inch square, about 
1/4 inch thick. Cut out a small vent in the center. 
Transfer the stew to an 8-inch-square baking dish. 
Cover with the dough, allowing excess to overhang. 
Transfer to the freezer until cold, 20 minutes. 

3. Whisk the cream and egg yolk in a small bowl. 
Brush the crust with the egg wash. Bake the pie on 
a rimmed baking sheet until crust is golden brown 
and puffy, 35 to 40 minutes. Serve with aioli. 
fumet 

MAKES ABOUT 3 CUPS 

1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil 

1 medium onion, coarsely chopped 

1 leek, white and pale-green parts only, 
washed well and coarsely chopped 


Coarsely chopped fronds from 

1 fennel bulb 

2 garlic cloves 

Reserved lobster shell from Provencal 

Seafood Pie (recipe above) 

Reserved shrimp shells from Provencal 

Seafood Pie (recipe above) 

4 sprigs fresh flat-leaf parsley 

1 bay leaf 
1/2 cup dry white wine 


1 bottle (8 ounces) clam juice 
3 canned whole peeled plum tomatoes, 
crushed 
1/4 teaspoon saffron threads, crumbled 


Pinch of cayenne pepper 

Coarse salt 

1. Heat the oil in a medium saucepan over medium-
high heat. Add the onion, leek, fennel fronds, and 
garlic; cook, stirring occasionally, until the vegetables 
are softened, about 6 minutes. Add the lobster 
shells and shrimp shells, parsley, and bay leaf; cook, 
stirring occasionally, 2 minutes. Stir in the wine, 
clam juice, tomatoes, and 11/2 cups water. Reduce 
heat to medium low; simmer, stirring occasionally, 
20 minutes. 
2. Pour the stock through a fine sieve into a medium 
bowl; discard the solids. Add the saffron and 
cayenne. Season with salt. The fumet can be stored 
in the freezer up to 3 months. 
304 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 








aioli 

MAKES ABOUT 1 CUP 

2 large egg yolks 
3 small garlic cloves 


Coarse salt 
1/2 teaspoon Dijon mustard 
1/2 cup olive oil 
1/2 cup plus 2 tablespoons extra-virgin 


olive oil 

Process the egg yolks, garlic, a pinch of salt, and 
mustard in a food processor until smooth. With the 









black pepper mussels 

SERVES 2 

Liana DiMeglio of Liana's Trattoria in Fairfield, 
Connecticut, brought this recipe from Naples, 
Italy, years ago. 

11/2 pounds mussels (about 50 small), 
scrubbed and debearded 

2 teaspoons freshly ground pepper 

Extra-virgin olive oil, for drizzling 

Lemon wedges, for serving 

1. Put the mussels and 1/4 cup water in a large skillet. 
Season with 1 teaspoon pepper. Cover, and cook 
over high heat, stirring once, until the mussels open, 
2 to 3 minutes. Discard unopened shells. 
2. Transfer the mussels to a serving bowl. Season 
with the remaining pepper, drizzle with olive oil, 
and serve with lemon wedges. 
tuna steaks with mint sauce 

SERVES 6 

You can use any firm-fleshed fish for this recipe. 
Scattering salt in the skillet prevents the fish 
from sticking without adding fat, and also seasons 
it. This dish is delicious at any temperature. 

2 garlic cloves 
11/2 cups loosely packed fresh mint leaves 

1 cup loosely packed fresh flat-leaf parsley 
3 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 


1 tablespoon red-wine vinegar 
1/4 to 1/3 cup extra-virgin olive oil 


Coarse salt 

6 tuna steaks (1/2 inch thick), cut from the 
narrow end of the loin 


1. Coarsely chop the garlic. Scatter the mint and 
parsley over the garlic, and continue to chop until 
the mixture is minced together. Transfer to a small 
bowl; stir in the lemon juice and vinegar. Stir in the 
oil to form a slightly thick paste; set aside. 
2. Heat a large skillet over high heat; generously 
scatter salt in the bottom. Add the fish to the skillet. 
Cook, turning once, until the fish is opaque and 
just cooked through, 2 to 3 minutes per side. 
3. Transfer the fish to a serving platter; spoon mint 
sauce on top. Serve with more sauce on the side. 
FISH AND SHELLFISH 305 


mussels in parsley vinaigrette 

SERVES 4 TO 8 

1/2 cup plus 3 tablespoons extra-virgin 
olive oil 


1/2 cup thinly sliced shallots, plus 
1 tablespoon finely chopped 
(about 3 total) 


1/2 cup dry white wine 

3 pounds mussels (about 100 small), 
scrubbed and debearded 


1 teaspoon Dijon mustard 

3 tablespoons rice-wine vinegar 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

3 tablespoons finely chopped fresh flat-leaf 
parsley, plus leaves for garnish 

Lettuce leaves, for serving (optional) 

1. Heat 2 tablespoons oil in a large pot over medium 
heat. Add the sliced shallots; cook, stirring, until 
translucent, about 3 minutes. Add the wine; bring 
to a boil. Add the mussels; cover and cook, stirring 
once, until the mussels open, about 3 minutes. Discard 
unopened shells. 
2. Remove the mussels with a slotted spoon; discard 
the cooking liquid. Chill the mussels in a bowl 
in the refrigerator, about 1 hour. 
3. Whisk together the mustard, chopped shallots, 
and vinegar; season with salt and pepper. Pour in 
the remaining 1/2 cup plus 1 tablespoon oil in a slow, 
steady stream, whisking until emulsified. Whisk in 
the parsley. The vinaigrette can be stored in the refrigerator 
up to 3 days. 
4. Toss the chilled mussels with 1/2 cup vinaigrette. 
If desired, serve on the half-shell on a bed of lettuce. 
Garnish with parsley. Drizzle with more vinaigrette, 
if desired. 
trout with rosemary 
and white beans 
(trota al rosmarino con fagioli) 


SERVES 8 

You can serve this dish hot, cold, or at room temperature. 
Cook the fish in batches if your oven is 
small. Dried beans work best, but you can substitute 
6 cups of drained, rinsed canned beans; 
begin with step 3. 

1 pound dried cannellini beans 

14 garlic cloves, 4 peeled and 10 peeled and 
crushed with the flat side of a large knife 


Coarse salt 
1 medium tomato, coarsely chopped 


1/2 medium red onion, thinly sliced 
2 sprigs fresh sage 


1 cup extra-virgin olive oil, plus more 
for the baking sheets 


Freshly ground pepper 

8 whole trout (1 pound each), cleaned 
and deboned, heads and tails left on 


16 sprigs fresh rosemary 

Juice of 2 lemons, plus 2 more lemons, 
cut into wedges, for serving 

3/4 cup dry white wine 
1. Rinse the beans. Transfer to a large bowl; cover 
with water by 2 inches. Cover loosely with plastic 
wrap. Let the beans soak at room temperature 7 
hours or refrigerate overnight. 
2. Drain the beans. Transfer to a large stockpot. Add 
12 cups cold water and 2 crushed garlic cloves. 
Bring to a boil. Reduce heat to medium-low. Simmer 
until tender, 40 to 45 minutes. Drain. Season 
with salt. Transfer to a large bowl. 
3. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Add 2 crushed garlic 
cloves, the tomato, onion, sage, and 1/4 cup oil to the 
bowl with beans. Season with salt and pepper. Toss 
to combine. Transfer to a 9 x 1  baking dish. 
Bake 15 minutes. 
4. Meanwhile, open each fish like a book, and place 
them on oiled baking sheets, skin sides down. Season 
with salt and pepper. Rub the flesh with the 4 
peeled whole garlic cloves; discard the garlic. Roll 
each rosemary sprig in oil from the baking sheets; 
306 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


place 2 sprigs on top of each fish. Drizzle the fish 
with remaining 3/4 cup oil. Arrange the remaining 
6 crushed garlic cloves around fish. 

5. Remove beans from oven; toss. Bake until slightly 
golden, about 10 minutes. 
6. Bake the fish until the flesh is opaque, about 10 
minutes. Remove from the oven; pour the lemon 
juice and wine over the fish. Bake 2 minutes more. 
Serve the fish with the beans and lemon wedges. 
grilled prawns with pistou 

SERVES 4 

You can substitute 1 pound large shrimp with 
shells for the prawns. 

1/4 cup whole raw almonds 

2 cups loosely packed fresh basil leaves 
1 cup loosely packed fresh flat-leaf parsley 


12 anchovy fillets, rinsed 
2 garlic cloves, peeled 


1/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons extra-virgin 
olive oil 


Zest of 1 lemon, plus lemon 
wedges, for serving 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

12 prawns, shells and heads intact 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Toast the almonds on 
a rimmed baking sheet in oven, stirring occasionally, 
until fragrant and golden brown, about 10 minutes. 
Let cool completely; coarsely chop. 
2. Process the almonds, basil, parsley, anchovies, 
and garlic in a food processor until combined. Add 
the oil in a slow, steady stream, and process until 
smooth. Transfer to a large bowl. Stir in the lemon 
zest; season with salt and pepper. Reserve 1/4 cup 
pistou for dipping. 
3. Heat a grill to medium-high (if using a charcoal 
grill, coals are ready when you can hold your hand 
5 inches above grate for just 3 to 4 seconds). Toss 
the prawns with the remaining pistou. Grill, turning 
once, until cooked through, about 21/2 minutes 
per side; season with salt and pepper. Serve with 
the lemon wedges and reserved pistou for dipping. 
clams with 
lemongrass and chiles 


SERVES 6 TO 8 

This dish is also delicious with mussels. Decrease 
the amount of chiles if you like it less spicy. 

Coarse salt 

4 dozen small clams, such as littleneck, 
rinsed well (about 5 pounds) 


2 stalks fresh lemongrass, hard outer 
leaves removed and reserved, bottom 4 
inches of stalks thinly sliced crosswise 


2 tablespoons vegetable oil 

2 shallots, thinly sliced (about 1/2 cup) 

3 garlic cloves, minced 

2 small fresh green chiles, such as 
jalapeno, serrano, or Thai chiles, 
thinly sliced crosswise 


3 small fresh red chiles, such as 
cherry peppers or Holland chiles, 
thinly sliced crosswise 


1/2 cup lime juice, plus lime wedges, 
for garnish (5 limes total) 


1/4 cup Asian fish sauce 

1 cup loosely packed fresh cilantro 
leaves, coarsely chopped 


1. Dissolve 2 tablespoons salt in a large bowl of cold 
water. Add the clams. Let soak at room temperature 
15 minutes. Drain. 
2. Scrub the clams under cold running water. Transfer 
to a large bowl of fresh cold water. Repeat, scrubbing 
the clams and rinsing in fresh water until you 
no longer see any grit. Drain. Refrigerate, uncovered, 
until ready to use, up to 8 hours. 
3. Put the reserved lemongrass leaves in a large pot 
with 1/2 inch of water. Bring to a boil. Add the clams. 
Steam, covered, until the clams open, 6 to 7 minutes. 
Drain. Discard any unopened clams and the leaves. 
4. Add the oil, sliced lemongrass, the shallots, garlic, 
and chiles. Cook over medium-high heat, stirring 
constantly, until the lemongrass and shallots 
turn golden, about 2 minutes. Remove from heat. 
Add the clams to the pot, and gently stir to coat. 
5. Stir together the lime juice and fish sauce; pour 
over the clams. Transfer the clams to a serving bowl; 
sprinkle with cilantro. Garnish with lime wedges. 
FISH AND SHELLFISH 307 


seared salmon with 
savoy cabbage and lentils 


SERVES 4 

1 cup French green lentils 

2 medium carrots, peeled and cut 
into   dice (about 3/4 cup) 


2 garlic cloves 

1 bay leaf 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil 

4 slices thick-cut bacon, cut 
into   pieces 


3 tablespoons unsalted butter 

1 medium leek, white and pale-green 
parts only, cut into  -thick rounds, 
rinsed well 


1 small Savoy cabbage (about 1 pound), 
cored and cut into  -thick wedges 


3 tablespoons Dijon mustard 
4 salmon fillets (at least 21/2 inches wide 
and about 7 ounces each), with skin 
1/4 cup chopped fresh flat-leaf parsley 


1/2 lemon 

1. Put the lentils, carrots, garlic, and bay leaf in a 
medium saucepan; cover with cold water by 4 
inches. Bring to a boil. Reduce heat; simmer, stirring 
occasionally, until the lentils are tender, about 
15 minutes. Drain; return the mixture to the pan. 
Add 1 teaspoon salt; season with pepper. Stir in 1 
tablespoon oil; cover to keep warm. 
2. Cook the bacon in a medium skillet over 
medium-high heat, stirring occasionally, until crisp. 
Drain on paper towels. Reserve the fat; wipe the skillet 
clean. Add the bacon to the lentil mixture. 
3. Melt the butter in a medium saucepan over 
medium-low heat; add the leek. Cook, stirring, until 
softened, about 8 minutes. Stir in the cabbage and 
a pinch of salt. Add 1/4 cup water. Cover; cook over 
medium heat, stirring occasionally, until the cabbage 
is just tender, 4 to 5 minutes. Season with salt 
and pepper. Cover to keep warm. 
4. Stir together the mustard and 1 tablespoon oil in 
a shallow dish. Season the fillets with salt and pepper. 
Place the fillets in the dish to coat the skins with 
the mustard mixture. 
5. Add 1 tablespoon reserved bacon fat to the reserved 
skillet; heat over medium-high heat. In 
batches, if necessary (allow 1 inch between fillets), 
cook the fillets, skin sides down, until the skins are 
browned and very crisp, about 4 minutes. Flip; cook 
3 minutes more (for medium-rare). 
6. Add the remaining 2 tablespoons oil to the lentil 
mixture; stir in the parsley. Divide the lentils and 
salmon among serving plates. Squeeze the lemon 
over the cabbage; divide among plates. 
striped bass with 
cherry tomatoes and olives 


SERVES 4 

1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil 

4 garlic cloves, thinly sliced 

1 pound cherry tomatoes 

1/2 cup Gaeta or kalamata olives, 
pitted and halved 


3 tablespoons capers, drained 
2 teaspoons finely chopped fresh oregano 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

4 fillets (8 ounces each) striped bass, 
skinned 


1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Heat 2 tablespoons 
oil in a medium skillet over medium heat until hot 
but not smoking. Add the garlic; cook, stirring, until 
just golden, about 30 seconds. Add the tomatoes; 
cook until the skins begin to split, 2 to 3 minutes. 
Stir in the olives, capers, and oregano; cook 30 seconds 
more. Season with salt and pepper. 
2. Coat both sides of the fish with the remaining 2 
tablespoons oil; season with salt and pepper. Transfer 
to a medium roasting pan, skinned side down. 
Spoon the tomato mixture over the fish. Cook until 
opaque, 10 to 15 minutes. Serve topped with sauce 
from the pan. 
308 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


salmon, spinach, and 
potatoes baked in parchment 

SERVES 2 

1 tablespoon unsalted butter, softened 

1 tablespoon salt-packed capers, 
rinsed well and coarsely chopped 


1 tablespoon coarsely chopped fresh 
flat-leaf parsley 


1 garlic clove, finely chopped 

1 large russet potato (about 1 pound), 
cut into  -thick slices 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


2 shallots, thinly sliced 
3 ounces baby spinach (about 1 cup) 


2 salmon fillets (6 ounces and 11/2 inches 
thick each), skinned 


1 lemon, thinly sliced 

1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Place a rimmed baking 
sheet in the oven to heat. Cut 2 pieces of parchment 
paper, each measuring 12 x 17 inches. 
2. Stir together the butter, capers, parsley, and garlic 
in a small bowl; set aside. 
3. Divide the potato slices between the parchment 
rectangles, layering them in stacks to form a bed 
(slightly larger than the salmon fillet) to one side 
of crease. Season with salt and pepper. 
4. Top each bed of potatoes with one-quarter of the 
shallots, followed by half the spinach. Place the 
salmon fillets on top of the spinach. Divide the remaining 
shallots evenly between the packets. Top 
each salmon fillet with 2 lemon slices (reserve the 
remaining slices for garnish). Dot with caper butter; 
season with salt and pepper. 
5. Fold the parchment paper over ingredients at the 
crease. Starting with one end of the paper and keeping 
the edges together, make small overlapping 
pleats the length of the paper, creasing tightly as 
you go and shaping the edge into an arc. The packet 
should resemble a half-moon. 
6. Carefully transfer the packets to the preheated 
baking sheet. Bake until the packets have puffed, 
15 to 18 minutes. Transfer the packets to plates. 
Serve immediately, opening the packets at the table. 
Garnish with the remaining lemon slices. 






shrimp with kale and 
white beans baked in parchment 

SERVES 6 

This recipe, without the shrimp (and with vegetable 
stock), makes a nice vegetarian main dish; 
serve it with grated Parmesan cheese. 

1 carrot, peeled and cut into  -thick 
rounds (cut into half-moons, if large) 


1 celery stalk, thinly sliced (about 3/4 cup) 

1/2 medium red onion, finely chopped 
(about 1/2 cup) 


1 can (15 ounces) white beans, such as 
cannellini or navy, drained and rinsed 


3/4 teaspoon finely chopped fresh rosemary

2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 
3 tablespoons olive oil 


1 teaspoon coarse salt 
Freshly ground pepper 


1 small bunch kale (about 12 ounces), 
stems and center ribs discarded, leaves 
thinly sliced crosswise 


18 medium shrimp (about 8 ounces), 
peeled and deveined 


3/4 cup homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock 
1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Cut 6 pieces of parchment 
paper to measure 12 x 13 inches each. Stir together 
the carrots, celery, onion, beans, rosemary, 
lemon juice, oil, and salt in a large bowl; season with 
pepper. Add the kale and shrimp; toss well. 
2. Lay the parchment rectangles on a work surface. 
Divide the shrimp mixture evenly among them, 
mounding in the center of each. Working with one 
piece at a time, gather the paper around the filling 
to form a bundle; loosely tie with kitchen twine (18inch 
piece), leaving a small opening. Pour 2 tablespoons 
stock into the opening of each bundle; tie 
the twine in a bow tightly to seal. 
3. Transfer the bundles to a rimmed baking sheet. 
Bake 20 minutes; shrimp should be cooked through. 
Transfer the packets to bowls. Serve immediately, 
opening the packets at the table. 
FISH AND SHELLFISH 309 








citrus-roasted salmon with 
spring pea sauce 

SERVES 8 

1 side of salmon (about 3 pounds), 
trimmed of fat and excess skin, small pin 
bones removed with tweezers 

Freshly grated zest of 1 orange, plus 2 

oranges, cut into  -thick rounds 

Freshly grated zest of 1 lemon, plus 2 

lemons, cut into  -thick rounds 

Freshly grated zest of 1 lime 

2 teaspoons coarse salt 

2 teaspoons sugar 

11/2 teaspoons freshly ground white pepper 
1 teaspoon coriander seeds, crushed 

2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
Spring Pea Sauce (recipe follows) 


Pea shoots or watercress, for garnish 

1. Place the salmon, skin side down, in a nonreactive 
baking dish (glass or ceramic) large enough for 
it to lie flat. 
2. Stir together the zests, salt, sugar, pepper, and 
coriander in a small bowl. Rub the spice blend all 
over the salmon. Wrap the salmon in plastic wrap. 
Refrigerate 2 hours. 
3. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Wipe the spice blend 
from the salmon with paper towels. Let the fish 
stand at room temperature 20 minutes. 
4. Arrange half of the orange and lemon slices in a 
single layer in a large roasting pan; place the salmon, 
skin side down, on top. Rub oil all over salmon. 
Roast until cooked through, about 17 minutes. 
5. Cut the salmon crosswise into 8 pieces. Divide 
the pea sauce among serving plates. Place a piece 
of salmon on each plate, and garnish with pea 
shoots and the remaining orange and lemon slices. 






spring pea sauce 

MAKES 3/4 CUP 

You can make this sauce with thawed frozen peas 
instead of fresh, in which case they don't need to 
be blanched. The sauce can be made up to 1 day 
ahead and refrigerated in an airtight container. 
Reheat over medium-low heat, adding water to 
thin, if necessary. 

Coarse salt 
11/3 cups shelled fresh peas 

1 cup loosely packed watercress (1 ounce) 

4 teaspoons cold unsalted butter 

1. Prepare an ice-water bath; set aside. Bring a 
medium pot of water to a boil; add salt. Blanch the 
peas and watercress until bright green, about 45 
seconds. Immediately transfer with a slotted spoon 
to the ice-water bath to stop the cooking. 
2. Drain the peas and watercress, then puree in a 
blender until smooth, adding 4 to 5 tablespoons 
water to thin (mixture should be just thick enough 
to coat the back of a spoon). Pass the puree through 
a fine sieve into a small saucepan. Place over low 
heat, and whisk in the butter, 1 teaspoon at a time; 
whisk until emulsified. Season the sauce with salt. 
310 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


chinese-style steamed sea bass 
with vegetables 

SERVES 2 

1 whole sea bass (2 pounds), cleaned 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

4 thin slices peeled fresh ginger, 
plus 2 teaspoons grated ginger 


3 garlic cloves, thinly sliced 

10 sprigs cilantro, plus 1 tablespoon 
coarsely chopped for garnish 


31/2 tablespoons toasted sesame oil 

11/2 pounds baby bok choy, white stems 
cut crosswise into  -thick pieces 
and leaves discarded 

10 small shiitake mushrooms, stemmed 
and sliced 1/4 inch thick 


7 scallions, thinly sliced on the diagonal 
21/2 tablespoons soy sauce 

21/2 tablespoons rice-wine vinegar 

1 tablespoon mirin (Japanese sweet rice 
wine) or packed brown sugar 


1. Rinse the fish thoroughly under cold running 
water; remove any debris from the cavity with a 
spoon; pat dry. Season the cavity with salt and pepper; 
stuff with the ginger slices, 4 slices garlic, and 
the cilantro sprigs. Rub the fish with 11/2 tablespoons 
sesame oil. Season with salt and pepper. 
2. Put the bok choy, mushrooms, two-thirds of the 
scallions, the remaining garlic, the grated ginger, 
and 1/4 teaspoon salt in a medium bowl. Season with 
pepper, and toss. 
3. Transfer half of the bok choy mixture to a 9 x 
1  baking pan; place the fish on top. Top with 
the remaining bok choy mixture. Whisk together 
the soy sauce, vinegar, mirin, and 1/4 teaspoon salt; 
drizzle over the fish. Tightly cover the pan with foil. 
4. Pour water to a depth of 1/4 inch in another 9 x 13inch 
baking pan; bring to a boil on top of the stove. 
Reduce heat; let simmer. Set the pan with the fish 
on top; steam until cooked through, 16 to 20 minutes. 
Transfer to a platter; garnish with the remaining 
scallions and chopped cilantro. Drizzle 
with the remaining 2 tablespoons sesame oil. 
 

FISH AND SHELLFISH 311 


malaysian shrimp curry 

SERVES 4 TO 6 

2 teaspoons whole coriander seeds 

1 teaspoon whole cumin seeds 
8 whole black peppercorns 


1 tablespoon paprika 
1 teaspoon cayenne pepper 


1/4 teaspoon ground turmeric 

1 piece (2 inches) peeled fresh ginger, 
sliced 


6 garlic cloves, sliced 
2 tablespoons vegetable oil 


1 medium onion, very finely chopped 

1 can (14 ounces) unsweetened 
coconut milk 


11/4 teaspoons coarse salt 

11/2 teaspoons tamarind concentrate 
(or lemon juice) 

11/2 pounds large shrimp, peeled and 
deveined, tails left intact 

1/2 cup fresh Thai or regular basil leaves 
6 cups cooked basmati rice, for serving 


1. Finely grind the coriander, cumin, and peppercorns 
in a coffee or spice grinder; transfer to a bowl. 
Stir in the paprika, cayenne, and turmeric. Process 
the ginger, garlic, and 1/4 cup water in a food processor 
until smooth; stir into the spices. 
2. Heat the oil in a large Dutch oven over medium-
high heat until hot but not smoking. Add the onion; 
cook, stirring often, until translucent, about 5 minutes. 
Add the spice paste; cook, stirring, 2 minutes. 
Add 11/4 cups water; bring to a simmer. 
3. Reduce heat to medium-low. Cover; simmer 10 
minutes. Uncover. Stir in the coconut milk, salt, and 
tamarind. Simmer until thickened, about 30 minutes. 
4. Stir in the shrimp and basil, and simmer, stirring 
occasionally, until the shrimp are cooked through, 
about 8 minutes. Serve immediately over rice. 
poached cod with parsley sauce 

SERVES 4 

This main dish is delicious served with boiled 
potatoes or rice. 

2 tablespoons unsalted butter 

2 tablespoons all-purpose flour 
1/2 cup whole milk 


1/2 cup homemade or store-bought 
fish or vegetable stock 


Coarse salt 

3/4 cup finely chopped fresh flat-leaf parsley, 
plus 4 sprigs, for garnish 
2 tablespoons finely chopped fresh chives 
1 strip lemon peel (3 inches) 


1/4 cup plus 2 teaspoons fresh lemon juice 
(about 2 lemons) 


4 cod fillets (5 ounces each), skinned 

1. Melt the butter over medium heat in a small 
saucepan. Add the flour; whisk until a paste forms. 
Reduce heat to low; cook, whisking, 2 minutes. 
Whisking constantly, pour in the milk in a slow, 
steady stream; whisk until incorporated. Whisk in 
the stock. Add 1/2 teaspoon salt, and cook, whisking 
occasionally, 10 minutes. Remove from heat; let 
stand 10 minutes to thicken slightly. Stir in the parsley 
and chives. 
2. Meanwhile, bring 11/2 quarts water, the lemon 
peel, 1/4 cup lemon juice, and 1/2 teaspoon salt to a 
boil in a medium saute pan or other wide straight-
sided pan. Place the fillets in the liquid (do not 
crowd). Return to a boil, then immediately turn off 
the heat. Let stand until just cooked through, about 
10 minutes. 
3. Reheat the sauce over medium-low heat, if necessary, 
and add the remaining 2 teaspoons lemon 
juice. Gently lift the fillets from the liquid with a 
slotted spatula; place 1 fillet on each of 4 plates. 
Spoon one-quarter of the sauce over each serving, 
and garnish with a parsley sprig. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 214 CALORIES, 8 G FAT, 

72 MG CHOLESTEROL, 7 G CARBOHYDRATE, 713 MG SODIUM, 

28 G PROTEIN, 1 G FIBER 

312 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


poached salmon 
steaks with creamy dill sauce 


SERVES 4 

1/2 cup fresh lemon juice (2 juiced halves 
reserved) 


Coarse salt 
11/2 teaspoons whole black peppercorns 

4 salmon steaks (each 3/4 inch thick) 
1 small fennel bulb, trimmed and sliced 


1 small onion, thinly sliced 

1/2 cup finely chopped fresh dill, plus 8 
sprigs, plus more sprigs for garnish 


8 sprigs flat-leaf parsley 
1/2 cup mayonnaise 


1/2 cup sour cream 

3/4 cup snipped fresh chives 
Freshly ground pepper 

1. Bring 6 quarts water, 6 tablespoons lemon juice, 
the lemon halves, 1 tablespoon salt, and the peppercorns 
to a boil in a large, wide pot. Reduce heat; 
let simmer. 
2. Season 2 salmon steaks with salt. Place one-
roasted wild striped bass 

SERVES 4 

2 bulbs fennel, with stalks and fronds 

1 cup dry white wine 

13/4 pounds wild striped bass fillets (each 1 to 
11/2 inches thick) 

1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


1. Preheat the oven to 450 degrees  F. Remove the stalks 
from the fennel bulbs; reserve the bulbs for another 
use. Remove the feathery fronds from the stalks, 
and reserve for garnish. Using a sharp knife, halve 
the stalks lengthwise. Arrange the stalks in the bottom 
of a 9 x 1  baking dish; pour the wine over 
the stalks. Lay the fish fillets on top; drizzle with oil, 
and season with salt and pepper. 
2. Cover the pan tightly with foil. Roast until the 
fish is just cooked through and opaque throughout, 
20 to 25 minutes. Divide the fish among serving 
plates, discarding the fennel stalks. Garnish with 
reserved fronds. 
quarter each of the fennel and onion and 2 sprigs 
each dill and parsley on a long sheet of parchment; 
top with salted steaks, one-quarter each fennel and 
onion, and 2 sprigs each dill and parsley. Fold the 
parchment to make a packet. Repeat the process to 
make another packet. 

3. With kitchen twine, tie one packet to a wire rack; 
place in the pot. Cover; poach until cooked through, 
about 10 minutes. 
4. Use tongs and a spatula to transfer the rack to a 
rimmed baking sheet. Carefully open the packet. 
Remove skin and any brown fat; discard. Transfer 
the fish to a platter, discarding the vegetables; cover. 
Cook the other packet. Reserve 1 tablespoon cooking 
liquid. 
5. Whisk the mayonnaise, sour cream, 2 tablespoons 
lemon juice, and cooking liquid in a bowl. 
Stir in the chopped dill and chives; season with salt 
and pepper. Garnish the salmon with dill sprigs; 
serve with sauce. 
BUYING FRESH FISH 

Steaks and fillets: These should smell fresh 
and have plump, moist flesh that is not discolored. 
Avoid any with flesh that appears 
dry and has sections that are separating. 

Whole fish: Look for gills ( just under the 
head) that are bright red, without any brown 
spots; eyes that are full and clean, not a discolored 
white or gray; and skin that is shiny, 
not dull. The flesh should be firm, and the 
odor should not be fishy. 

FISH AND SHELLFISH 313 


grilled tuna with cherry tomato 
salad and herbed bulgur 

SERVES 4 

1 cup bulgur wheat 

11/2 teaspoons coarse salt 

1/4 cup loosely packed inner celery 
leaves, roughly chopped 


1/4 cup loosely packed fresh mint 
leaves, roughly chopped 


1/4 cup loosely packed fresh cilantro 
leaves, roughly chopped 


1/4 teaspoon ground coriander 

1/2 pint cherry tomatoes, sliced in half 
2 scallions, thinly sliced into rounds 


2 teaspoons extra-virgin olive oil, plus 
more for the grill 


3 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 

Freshly ground pepper 

4 tuna steaks (each 6 ounces and 
about 1 inch thick) 


1. Bring 2 cups water to a boil. Place the bulgur in 
a large heatproof bowl; cover with the boiling water. 
Add 1/4 teaspoon salt; stir just to combine, and cover 
tightly with plastic wrap. Let steam until tender but 
still slightly chewy, 22 to 25 minutes. If all the water 
has not been absorbed, drain the bulgur in a sieve, 
then return it to the dried bowl. Let cool. Using a fork, 
stir in the celery leaves, mint, cilantro, and coriander. 
2. Make the cherry tomato salad: In a medium 
bowl, toss the tomatoes and scallions with the oil, 
lemon juice, and 1/4 teaspoon salt. Season with pepper. 
Set aside. 
3. Heat a lightly oiled grill or grill pan over medium-
high heat. Sprinkle both sides of each tuna steak 
with about 1/4 teaspoon salt; season evenly with pepper. 
Cook until the first side is seared with grill 
marks, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip the tuna, and cook 3 minutes 
more for medium-rare. Serve with herbed bulgur 
on the side and cherry tomato salad spooned 
on top. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 340 CALORIES, 5 G FAT, 

77 MG CHOLESTEROL, 31 G CARBOHYDRATE, 781 MG 

SODIUM, 45 G PROTEIN, 7 G FIBER 

slow-roasted salmon 
with caper and herb relish 


SERVES 4 

4 skinless salmon fillets (6 ounces each) 

11/4 teaspoons coarse salt 
Freshly ground pepper 

1 small shallot, finely chopped 
2 tablespoons capers, drained and rinsed 


Grated zest and juice of 1 lemon, 
preferably organic 


1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil 

1 cup loosely packed fresh flat-leaf parsley, 
roughly chopped 

2/3 cup chopped mixed fresh herbs, such 
as tarragon, chervil, dill, and mint 


1 bunch pencil-thin asparagus, tough 
ends snapped off 


1. Preheat the oven to 250 degrees  F, with the rack in the 
upper third. Place the salmon on a parchment-lined 
baking sheet. Sprinkle both sides of each fillet with 
1/4 teaspoon salt; season evenly with pepper. Bake 
until opaque but still bright pink in the middle, 25 
to 30 minutes. Remove from oven. 
2. Meanwhile, make the relish: In a small bowl, stir 
together the shallot, capers, lemon zest and juice, 
and remaining 1/4 teaspoon salt; season with pepper. 
Add the oil, parsley, and mixed herbs; toss. 
3. Place the asparagus in a steamer basket set over 
a pot of simmering water; steam until the spears 
are crisp-tender and bright green, 3 to 4 minutes. 
Divide the asparagus among serving plates. Place 
a salmon fillet on each plate next to the asparagus, 
and spoon relish on top of the fish. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 360 CALORIES, 22 G 

FAT, 112 MG CHOLESTEROL, 5 G CARBOHYDRATE, 206 MG 

SODIUM, 36 G PROTEIN, 2 G FIBER 

314 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 








sole rolls with 
spinach and lemon slices 


SERVES 4 

1 teaspoon olive oil 

1 shallot, minced 

3/4 pound spinach, stems removed 
Pinch of coarse salt 

Freshly ground pepper 

1 large lemon, washed 
1 tablespoon finely chopped almonds 


1 tablespoon mixed finely chopped 
fresh herbs, such as chervil, parsley, 
chives, and tarragon 


4 fillets (4 ounces each) gray sole, 
lemon sole, or flounder 


1/4 cup dry white wine 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F, with the rack in the 
center. In a large saute pan, heat the oil over low 
heat. Add the shallot; cook, stirring frequently, until 
soft, about 2 minutes. Raise heat to medium; add 
spinach and salt, and season with pepper. Cook, 
tossing frequently, until wilted and bright green, 
about 2 minutes. Transfer to a colander, pressing 
down to remove liquid. Chop finely; squeeze out remaining 
liquid. Divide the spinach into 4 equal parts. 
2. Slice the lemon in half crosswise; grate the zest 
of half, and combine with the almonds and herbs in 
a small bowl; set aside. Slice the other lemon half 
very thinly into rounds. 
3. Lay the fillets flat on a work surface, prettiest side 
down; place 1 part spinach at the narrow end of 
each. Roll the fish into a cylinder, enclosing the 
spinach. Place in a gratin dish, with lemon rounds 
in between. Pour the wine into the dish. Sprinkle 
one-quarter of the almond mixture on top of each 
roll; cover with parchment and then aluminum foil. 
Bake until the fish is opaque and cooked through, 
15 to 20 minutes. Serve immediately. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 152 CALORIES, 5 G FAT, 

57 MG CHOLESTEROL, 4 G CARBOHYDRATE, 236 MG SODIUM, 

22 G PROTEIN, 3 G FIBER 







seared shrimp 
with lemon and garlic 


SERVES 12 

This versatile dish is equally delicious served 
piping hot or at room temperature. 

4 lemons 

4 pounds large shrimp, peeled, 
deveined, and rinsed 


3 garlic cloves, minced 

1/2 cup extra-virgin olive oil 

11/2 teaspoons coarse salt 
1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 

1. Finely grate the zest of 3 lemons. Juice all 4 
lemons; strain the juice, and set aside. Place the 
shrimp in a large bowl; add the lemon zest, garlic, 
and 1/4 cup olive oil; toss well to coat evenly. Season 
with salt and pepper. 
2. Heat a large saute pan over medium heat. Add 1 
tablespoon olive oil, and heat until the oil is hot but 
not smoking. Working in batches, arrange a single 
layer of shrimp in the pan, being careful not to 
crowd them. Cook until the underside is golden 
brown, 45 to 60 seconds. Turn over, and continue 
cooking until the other side is golden brown and 
the shrimp are cooked through, about 1 minute. 
Transfer to a large serving platter. Deglaze the pan 
with 11/2 tablespoons reserved lemon juice, stirring 
up any browned bits with a wooden spoon, and pour 
the pan sauce over the shrimp. Cover loosely with 
foil while repeating the process with the remaining 
batches, adding 1 tablespoon oil each time. 
FISH AND SHELLFISH 315 


pan-fried scallops 
on caramelized fennel 


SERVES 4 

2 pounds fennel bulbs (about 2 medium) 

1 garlic clove, finely chopped 
2 shallots, finely chopped 


2 dried bay leaves 
Zest of 1 orange 


1/2 teaspoon ground cardamom 
8 tablespoons olive oil 


1 tablespoon coarse salt 
Pinch of freshly ground white pepper 


2 teaspoons light-brown sugar 

1 141/2-ounce can low-sodium chicken 
broth, or homemade 


1 sprig thyme 

3/4 cup water 
8 large scallops (about 14 ounces), 
muscles removed 


1/3 cup fresh flat-leaf parsley, packed 

2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 
2 tablespoons toasted pine nuts, for garnish 

Shaved truffle, for garnish (optional) 

1. Preheat the oven to 325 degrees F. Trim the feathery tops 
from the fennel bulbs, and discard. Trim the stem 
pieces and outer leaves from the bulbs; clean, and 
reserve 2 cups (about 8 ounces) of these trimmings 
for the puree. Slice each bulb through the root into 
4  -thick strips. 
2. In a small roasting pan, combine the garlic, 1 shallot, 
1 bay leaf, orange zest, 1/4 teaspoon cardamom, 
3 tablespoons olive oil, 1/2 teaspoon salt, white pepper, 
1 teaspoon brown sugar, and the chicken broth. 
Add the fennel slices, and gently toss to coat with 
the mixture. Cover the roasting pan with foil, and 
cook in the oven until the fennel is tender and most 
of the liquid has evaporated, about 45 minutes. Remove 
the fennel from the pan, and transfer to a plate 
to cool. 
3. Coarsely chop the fennel trimmings. In a medium 
saucepan, heat 1 tablespoon olive oil over medium-
high heat. Add the trimmings, the remaining shallot, 
1/4 teaspoon cardamom, bay leaf, and thyme. 
Cook, stirring occasionally, until the trimmings 
soften, about 4 minutes. 

4. Add the water, 1/2 teaspoon salt, and 1/2 teaspoon 
brown sugar; bring to a boil. Reduce heat; cover the 
pan, and simmer until the trimmings are soft when 
pierced with a fork, about 20 minutes. Remove the 
bay leaf and thyme; transfer the mixture to the bowl 
of a food processor. Puree, adding 2 tablespoons 
oil through the feed tube with the motor running. 
Set aside. 
5. In a large nonstick skillet over medium-high heat, 
saute the reserved fennel slices until golden brown, 
2 to 3 minutes on each side. Remove from the pan, 
and set aside. In the same pan, heat the remaining 
2 tablespoons olive oil. Add the scallops, and sprinkle 
with 1 teaspoon salt; saute until brown on the 
first side, about 4 minutes. Turn, sprinkle with the 
remaining teaspoon salt, and add the parsley. Saute 
until the other side is brown, about 2 minutes. Remove 
from heat; add the lemon juice to the pan. 
Toss the scallops and parsley in the pan juices. 
6. To serve, place 2 1/4-cup dollops of fennel puree 
on each plate; top each dollop with a fennel slice 
and a scallop. Garnish with wilted parsley leaves, 
toasted pine nuts, and shaved truffle, if desired. 
lighter fish and chips 

SERVES 4 

2 large russet potatoes (about 1 pound), 
scrubbed 


2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 


1/2 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 

4 6-ounce Chilean sea bass or cod fillets 
(about 1 inch thick), skin removed 


1/2 cup low-fat buttermilk 
1/2 cup yellow cornmeal 


1/4 teaspoon paprika 
Lemon wedges, for serving 


Malt vinegar, for serving 

316 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


1. Preheat the oven to 450 degrees F, with racks in the upper 
and lower thirds of oven. Cut the potatoes lengthwise 
into  -thick strips. Rinse well in a large 
bowl of cold water, and pat dry with a kitchen towel. 
Transfer to a large baking sheet. Drizzle with 1 tablespoon 
oil, and sprinkle with 1/4 teaspoon each 
salt and pepper; toss well. Arrange strips in an even 
layer on the sheet. Bake on the lower rack until 
golden and crisp, about 30 minutes. 
2. Meanwhile, place the fish fillets in a large bowl. 
Add the buttermilk, and gently turn the fish to coat. 
In another shallow bowl, combine the cornmeal, paprika, 
and remaining 1/4 teaspoon salt and pepper. 
Add the fillets to the cornmeal one at a time, turning 
to completely coat. Transfer to a plate while 
repeating with the remaining fillets. 
3. Heat a 1  cast-iron skillet over medium-high 
heat. Add the remaining tablespoon of oil; swirl to 
coat. Add the fillets, being careful not to overcrowd 
them. Cook until nicely crusted, about 1 minute; 
turn over with a spatula. Place the skillet in the top 
third of the oven, and cook until the fish is still firm 
but beginning to flake when pressed in the center, 
about 8 minutes. To serve, divide fish and potatoes 
among plates; offer lemon wedges and malt vinegar 
on the side. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 366 CALORIES, 11 G FAT, 

72 MG CHOLESTEROL, 30 G CARBOHYDRATE, 506 MG 

SODIUM, 36 G PROTEIN, 2 G FIBER 

beer-battered cod 

SERVES 6 TO 8 

Fried fish is the traditional filling of Baja tacos. 
They are simply garnished with shredded cabbage, 
pico de gallo, and sour cream. 

2 large eggs 
1 cup beer 


11/2 teaspoons coarse salt 
1/2 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper 

1 cup all-purpose flour 
Pinch of cayenne pepper 


Vegetable oil, for frying 

11/2 pounds cod fillets, cut crosswise into 
 -thick strips 

1. Whisk together the eggs, beer, 1/2 teaspoon salt, 
and 1/4 teaspoon black pepper in a medium bowl; 
set aside. In a separate medium bowl, whisk together 
the flour, remaining teaspoon salt and 1/4 teaspoon 
black pepper, and cayenne; add to the egg 
mixture. Whisk until the batter is well combined; 
let rest 15 minutes. 
2. Meanwhile, heat oil in a large cast-iron or heavy 
skillet until a deep-fry thermometer registers 375 degrees F. 
3. Dip the fish strips one at a time into the batter, 
letting excess drip off. Working in batches, drop 
carefully into hot oil; fry until the fish is golden and 
crisp and cooked through, about 4 minutes. Remove 
with a slotted spoon; drain on paper towels. Serve 
immediately. 
grilled mahimahi 

SERVES 6 TO 8 

You can use other types of firm, white-fleshed 
fish, or even shrimp or chicken. 

3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

3 tablespoons fresh lime juice 

3 garlic cloves, smashed 

1/2 teaspoon cumin seeds 
1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 
2 to 3 sprigs thyme, oregano, or other herbs 
11/2 pounds mahimahi fillets 

1. Make the marinade: Combine the olive oil, lime 
juice, garlic, cumin seeds, pepper, and herbs in a 
large resealable plastic bag or airtight plastic container. 
Shake well to combine. 
2. Add the fish, and shake gently to coat well with 
the marinade. Refrigerate at least 1 hour and up to 
4 hours. 
3. Heat a grill or grill pan. Remove the fish from the 
marinade, letting excess drip off; grill until browned 
on the outside and cooked through, about 4 minutes 
per side, turning once. Serve hot or at room 
temperature. 
FISH AND SHELLFISH 317 








halibut with mushrooms 

SERVES 10 

1/4 cup olive oil 

4 tablespoons unsalted butter 

4 large leeks, white and light-green parts 
only, cut into thin matchsticks, well 
washed, and dried (about 10 cups) 


4 shallots, thinly sliced into rings (1 cup) 

8 medium garlic cloves, thinly sliced 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
10 halibut fillets (each 6 ounces, 1 inch thick; 
preferably square cuts), skinned 
2 pounds oyster mushrooms, halved if large 


Chive Oil, for drizzling (recipe follows) 

Beet Salad, for serving (recipe follows) 

1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Heat 2 tablespoons 
oil and the butter in a large skillet over medium 
heat. Add the leeks, shallots, garlic, and 1/8 teaspoon 
each salt and pepper. Cook, stirring, until the leeks 
and shallots are translucent, about 3 minutes. 
Spread into 2 9 x 1  baking dishes, dividing 
evenly. Top with the fish; season with salt and pepper. 
Set aside. 
2. Heat 1 tablespoon oil in the same skillet over 
medium heat. Add half of the mushrooms and 1/2 
teaspoon salt. Raise heat to medium-high; cook, stirring, 
until tender, 3 to 5 minutes. Scatter the mushrooms 
over the fish. Repeat with the remaining oil 
and mushrooms and 1/2 teaspoon salt. 
3. Bake until the fish is cooked through, 18 to 20 
minutes. Transfer to plates. Drizzle with chive oil. 
Serve with beet salad. 
chive oil 

MAKES ABOUT 3/4 CUP 

2 large bunches chives (about 21/2 ounces), 
cut into   lengths 


1 cup extra-virgin olive oil 

1. Cook the chives in a small pot of boiling water 
until bright green, about 10 seconds. Drain; run 
under cold water. Pat dry. 
2. Put the chives in a blender. With the machine 
running, add the oil in a slow stream; puree. Let 
stand 1 hour. Strain through a damp cheesecloth-
lined sieve; discard the solids. 
beet salad 

SERVES 10 

8 small golden beets and 8 small red beets, 
stems trimmed to 1 inch 


3/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
4 tablespoons balsamic vinegar 


1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Drizzle the beets with 
1/4 cup oil on a rimmed baking sheet; season with 
salt and pepper. Cover with foil. Bake until tender, 
about 65 minutes. 
2. Let cool. Rub off the skins with paper towels; discard 
the skins. Cut into wedges. Put the golden and 
red beets into separate bowls. 
3. Whisk the vinegar and remaining oil in a small 
bowl; season with salt and pepper. 
4. Drizzle the beets in the bowls with dressing. Season 
with salt and pepper, if desired. Toss together 
just before serving. 
318 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 








barbecued salmon fillets 

SERVES 6 

2 teaspoons canola oil 

1 onion, roughly chopped 

2 garlic cloves, smashed 

1 carrot, peeled and roughly chopped 

1 celery stalk, roughly chopped 

2 tomatoes, seeded and roughly chopped 

2 tablespoons tomato paste 

2 tablespoons unsulfured molasses 

2 tablespoons honey 

2 tablespoons brown sugar 

2 teaspoons dry mustard 

1 teaspoon ground cumin 
11/2 teaspoons coarse salt 
1/2 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper 
Pinch of cayenne pepper, or to taste 
6 5-ounce salmon steaks or fillets 
Spiced Pilaf (recipe follows) 

1. Heat the oil in a saucepan over medium heat. Add 
the onion, garlic, carrot, and celery. Cook the vegetables 
until softened, 5 to 7 minutes. Add the tomatoes; 
cook the vegetables until very tender, about 
10 minutes more. Add the tomato paste, molasses, 
honey, sugar, mustard, cumin, 1 teaspoon salt, 1/4 teaspoon 
black pepper, cayenne pepper, and 2 cups 
water; stir to combine. Simmer gently until thickened, 
about 30 minutes. Transfer to a food processor 
or blender; puree until smooth. Refrigerate until 
ready to serve. 
2. Heat a grill or grill pan. Season the fish with the 
remaining 1/2 teaspoon salt and 1/4 teaspoon pepper. 
Brush generously with sauce. Grill until the fish is 
cooked through, 2 to 3 minutes per side. When the 
fish is done, remove and discard the skin. Serve over 
pilaf drizzled with sauce. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 300 CALORIES, 11 G FAT, 
78 MG CHOLESTEROL, 21 G CARBOHYDRATE, 363 MG 
SODIUM, 29 G PROTEIN, 2 G FIBER 







spiced pilaf 

SERVES 6 

2 teaspoons canola oil 
1 red onion, cut into   dice 
2 small carrots, peeled, cut into   dice 
1 stalk celery, cut into   slices 

1/4 cup dry white wine 
11/2 cups brown rice 

1 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 
1/2 teaspoon paprika 
1/4 teaspoon turmeric 
1/2 teaspoon ground cumin 


1. Heat the oil in a medium skillet over medium 
heat. Add the onion, carrots, and celery. Cook until 
tender, 3 to 4 minutes. Add the wine, and cook until 
most of the liquid has evaporated, about 2 minutes. 
Transfer to a medium bowl, and set aside to cool. 
2. Meanwhile, bring a medium saucepan of water 
to a boil. Stir in the rice, and cook until tender, 25 
to 30 minutes. Drain, and add to the bowl of vegetables. 
Season with salt, pepper, paprika, turmeric, 
and cumin. Serve with grilled salmon. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 213 CALORIES, 3 G FAT, 
0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 40 G CARBOHYDRATE, 203 MG 
SODIUM, 6 G PROTEIN, 3 G FIBER 

FISH AND SHELLFISH 319 








baked flounder 
with onion and lemon 


SERVES 4 

Be careful when transferring the fish from the 
baking dish to the plate-flounder is a fragile fish 
that falls apart easily. 

2 lemons, sliced into  -thick rounds 

2 medium onions, peeled and sliced into 
very thin rounds (8 ounces each) 


4 tablespoons unsalted butter 
1 cup dry white wine 


1 teaspoon freshly chopped thyme, plus 
several sprigs more 


Salt and freshly ground pepper 

4 6-ounce flounder fillets 

1. Heat the oven to 400 degrees F. Arrange the lemons and 
onions in a 9 x 1  Pyrex baking dish. Dot with 
the butter; add the wine and 1/4 cup cold water. Sprinkle 
with the chopped thyme; season with salt and 
pepper. Bake until the onions are soft and translucent, 
about 40 minutes. 
2. Remove the baking dish from the oven. Arrange 
the fish fillets over the lemons and onions. Season 
the fillets with salt and pepper. Scatter the fresh 
thyme sprigs over the fish. Baste the fish with a little 
cooking liquid. Bake until the fish is just opaque 
and cooked through, 16 to 18 minutes. Do not overcook. 
Serve with the cooked onions and lemons. 






shrimp kabobs with 
lemon wedges and cilantro 


MAKES 8 

1/2 cup loosely packed cilantro leaves, 
chopped 


1/2 cup extra-virgin olive oil 
2 pounds large shrimp (about 32) 


4 lemons, each cut into 8 wedges 

1 teaspoon coarse salt 

1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 

1. Combine the cilantro and olive oil in a large bowl. 
Set aside. Peel the shrimp to the first knuckle; devein. 
Rinse; pat dry. Place in the bowl with the 
cilantro-oil mixture, and coat. 
2. Thread 4 shrimp, alternating with lemon wedges, 
on 8 skewers. Gently brush with a little olive oil remaining 
in the bowl. Season with salt and pepper. 
3. Arrange the skewers, off direct heat, on a 
medium-hot grill. Grill, rotating the skewers and 
brushing with olive oil as necessary to prevent 
sticking, until cooked through, about 6 minutes, depending 
on the heat of the grill. Lemons should be 
soft and slightly charred. 
To keep bamboo skewers from burning, soak 
them in warm water for at least 30 minutes 
before using. Cooking times may be a bit 
shorter for metal skewers, which conduct heat. 

320 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 








tuna kabobs with 
marinated baby artichokes 

MAKES 8 

The baby artichokes are cooked in advance, so 
they only need to be grilled for a short time. 

3 tablespoons Dijon mustard 

1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice 
1/2 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes 


8 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
1 garlic clove, minced 


11/2 pounds tuna loin, cut into 1  cubes 
Marinated Baby Artichokes 
(recipe follows) 
1 tablespoon coarse salt 

1/2 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper 

1. Whisk together the mustard, lemon juice, red 
pepper flakes, 6 tablespoons olive oil, and garlic 
in a large bowl. Add the tuna, and toss to coat. 
2. Thread 4 cubes of tuna, alternating with artichokes, 
on each of 8 skewers. Gently brush with 
some of the remaining olive oil. Season with salt 
and pepper. 
3. Arrange the skewers, off direct heat, on a 
medium-hot grill. Grill, rotating the skewers and 
brushing with olive oil as necessary to prevent 
sticking, until the tuna is brown and charred on the 
outside and warm but still rare in the middle, about 
5 minutes, depending on the heat of the grill. The 
artichokes should be tender and slightly charred. 






marinated baby artichokes 

MAKES 2 CUPS 

These make a wonderful addition to any summer 
salad or antipasto. They can also be served as a 
side dish for roasted or grilled lamb. 

2 lemons 
11/2 pounds baby artichokes 

1 head garlic, cut in half 

2 tablespoons whole black peppercorns 

2 tablespoons coarse salt 

1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil 

1 small bunch fresh thyme 

Pinch of freshly ground black pepper 

1. Fill a large bowl with cold water; juice 2 lemons 
into the water. Set aside. Trim the spiky tops, tough 
stems, and outer leaves from the artichokes; halve 
lengthwise. Scrape any pink choke out from the center, 
leaving the artichoke half intact. Transfer cut 
artichokes to acidulated water immediately. 
2. Drain the artichokes. Fill a large saucepan with 
water. Add the artichokes, garlic halves, peppercorns, 
11/2 tablespoons salt, 2 tablespoons olive oil, 
and thyme to saucepan. Set over high heat; bring 
to a boil. Reduce heat; simmer, using a few layers 
of cheesecloth or a plate to keep the artichokes submerged, 
until tender when pierced with a sharp 
knife, about 5 minutes. 
3. Remove from the heat, and drain. Reserve the artichoke 
halves, some of the garlic, and a few sprigs 
of thyme. Place in a bowl, and drizzle with the remaining 
2 tablespoons olive oil. Season with the remaining 
11/2 teaspoons salt and pepper. Keep 
refrigerated, up to 5 days, until needed. 
FISH AND SHELLFISH 321 








scallop kabobs 
with beets and prosciutto 


MAKES 8 

If baby beets are not available, use large beets cut 
into   chunks. 

11/2 pounds baby beets, scrubbed, 
tops trimmed 

2 pounds sea scallops, muscle removed 

1/4 pound prosciutto, thinly sliced 

4 sprigs fresh mint 

2 lemons 

2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

1 tablespoon coarse salt 

1 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 

1. Fill a large saucepan with cold water. Add the 
beets; bring to a boil. Reduce heat to a simmer; cook 
until the beets are fork tender, about 15 minutes. 
Remove from heat. Let cool slightly; rub away the 
skins with a paper towel. Cut the beets in half, and 
set aside. 
2. Rinse the scallops; pat dry. Wrap the scallops in 
prosciutto, tucking a leaf or two of mint between 
prosciutto and scallop. Thread 4 scallops, alternating 
with beets, on each of 8 skewers. Squeeze the 
juice of 1 lemon over the skewers. Brush gently with 
some olive oil, and season with salt and pepper. 
3. Arrange the skewers, off direct heat, on a 
medium-hot grill. Grill, rotating the skewers and 
brushing with oil as needed to prevent sticking, 
until cooked through, about 5 minutes, depending 
on the heat of the grill. The beets should be soft and 
slightly charred. Remove from the grill; squeeze the 
remaining lemon over the skewers. 






indian-spiced halibut 
with yogurt 

SERVES 6 

If you cannot find fenugreek seed, this curry is 
equally satisfying when ground fenugreek is substituted; 
add with the other ground spices. 

2 tomatoes 

Curry Powder (recipe follows) 
1 teaspoon whole fenugreek seed 


2 teaspoons coarse salt 
2 teaspoons ground mustard 


1/4 teaspoon ground cardamom 
Pinch of ground cloves 


4 garlic cloves, minced 
1 tablespoon freshly grated ginger 


1 tablespoon dark-brown sugar 
1 tablespoon water 


4 teaspoons unsalted butter 
1 large onion, thinly sliced 


1 141/2-ounce can low-sodium vegetable 
stock 


1 green chile, finely chopped 

11/2 pounds halibut fillets (or other firm-
fleshed white-fish fillets, such as cod), 
cut into 6 pieces 

1 cup plain nonfat yogurt 

1. Bring a saucepan of water to a boil. Fill a bowl 
with ice and water. Cut an X in bottom of each 
tomato; plunge into the boiling water. Cook until 
the skin starts to peel back, about 30 seconds. 
Plunge into the ice bath to stop the cooking. When 
cool, peel off and discard the skins. Cut the tomatoes 
in half; squeeze out the seeds. Chop; set aside. 
2. In a food processor, pulse to combine the curry 
powder, fenugreek, salt, mustard, cardamom, and 
cloves. Add the garlic, ginger, brown sugar, and 
water. Puree until a smooth paste forms; set aside. 
322 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


3. Heat the butter in a large saucepan over medium 
heat. Stir in the curry paste; cook until fragrant, 
about 1 minute. Add the onion and half the stock; 
cook until the onion starts to soften, about 3 minutes. 
Add the chile and remaining stock. Bring to 
boil. Reduce to a gentle simmer, add the fish and 
tomatoes, and cook until the fish is opaque in the 
center, 6 to 8 minutes. Remove from heat; stir in the 
yogurt just before serving. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 234 CALORIES, 6 G FAT, 
44 MG CHOLESTEROL, 16 G CARBOHYDRATE, 595 MG 
SODIUM, 27 G PROTEIN, 2 G FIBER 







curry powder 

MAKES ABOUT 2 TABLESPOONS 

2 teaspoons coriander seed 

2 teaspoons cumin seed 

1/2 teaspoon cayenne pepper 

3/4 teaspoon ground turmeric 
1/4 teaspoon ground cinnamon 
Heat a skillet over medium-high heat. Add the coriander 
and cumin. Toast the seeds, tossing constantly, 
until fragrant. Transfer to a spice grinder. 
Add the cayenne, turmeric, and cinnamon. Pulse to 
combine. Use immediately. 

FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER RECIPE: 36 CALORIES, 2 G FAT, 
0 G PROTEIN, 0 G FIBER 

steamed striped bass 
and shiitakes with edamame 


SERVES 2 

This recipe can be doubled easily. Use a larger 
steamer, about ten inches in diameter, to cook all 
four portions at once in the same basket. 

11/4 teaspoons finely grated peeled 
fresh ginger 

1/4 teaspoon finely grated orange zest, 
plus 2 tablespoons fresh orange juice 


1/4 teaspoon ground coriander 
2 teaspoons toasted sesame oil, plus 
more for baskets 
1 tablespoon soy sauce 


2 teaspoons rice wine (mirin) or sherry 
2 scallions, finely chopped (about 1/2 cup) 


Freshly ground pepper 

2 fillets striped bass, red snapper, or 
bluefish (each 4 to 5 ounces, at least 


3/4 inch thick), skinned 
6 shiitake mushrooms, stemmed, 
caps scored with an X 


3/4 pound edamame in shells (soybeans) 
Sea or coarse salt 
1. Stir ginger, orange zest and juice, coriander, oil, 
soy sauce, wine, and scallions in a medium bowl. 
Season with pepper. Add fish and mushrooms; turn 
to coat completely. Marinate 10 minutes. 
2. Fill 2 woks or large pots with about 1 inch of 
water. Bring to a boil. Brush the bottom baskets of 
two 6-inch, 2-tiered round bamboo steamers with 
oil. Place 1 fillet and 3 mushrooms in a single layer 
in each bottom basket; place half the edamame in 
each top. Cover baskets; carefully set into boiling 
water. Steam until fish is just cooked through, 10 to 
14 minutes, checking occasionally to make sure the 
water doesn't completely evaporate. Sprinkle the 
edamame with salt. Serve in baskets. 
FISH AND SHELLFISH 323 








thai green shrimp curry 

SERVES 6 

3 large fresh green chiles, stems removed, 
roughly chopped, plus thinly sliced green 
chiles for garnish (optional) 


2 tablespoons Lemongrass Paste 
(recipe follows) 


3 tablespoons chopped fresh cilantro 
1 tablespoon coriander seed 


1 teaspoon cumin seed 
1 teaspoon coarse salt 


1 lime 
8 ounces dried rice noodles 


4 teaspoons vegetable oil 
1 red onion, cut into   pieces 


1 red bell pepper, seeded, cut into 
  pieces 


2 tablespoons cornstarch 

23/4 cups cold water 

1 small (or 1/2 large) pineapple, peeled, 
cored, and cut in   pieces 


1 31/2-ounce package enoki mushrooms 
1/4 cup low-fat canned coconut milk 


12 jumbo shrimp, peeled, tails intact, 
deveined 


1. Place the chopped chiles, lemongrass paste, 
cilantro, coriander and cumin seed, and salt in a 
food processor. Zest the lime; add. Puree until 
smooth, adding water 1 tablespoon at a time if necessary; 
set aside. Bring a pan of water to a boil. Add 
the noodles; cook until just tender, about 5 minutes. 
Drain; set aside in a bowl of cold water. 
2. Heat the oil in a large nonstick skillet over 
medium heat. Add the lemongrass mixture, and 
cook until fragrant, about 1 minute. Add the onion; 
cook until just softened, 6 to 8 minutes. Add the bell 
pepper; cook until just tender, about 3 minutes. 
Combine the cornstarch with the water; add to the 
pan. Add the pineapple, mushrooms, and coconut 
milk; simmer. Add the shrimp; cook until pink and 
opaque. Squeeze the juice from the lime; stir into mixture. 
Serve garnished with sliced chiles, if desired. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 277 CALORIES, 6 G FAT, 

43 MG CHOLESTEROL, 50 G CARBOHYDRATE, 239 MG 

SODIUM, 7 G PROTEIN, 2 G FIBER 

lemongrass paste 

MAKES 1 CUP 

Look for fresh lemongrass in Asian markets and 
some supermarkets. 

2 teaspoons extra-virgin olive oil 

6 shallots, finely chopped 

1 tablespoon freshly grated ginger 

3 garlic cloves, minced 

1 stalk lemongrass, pounded, cut in   

pieces (1 tablespoon dried) 

1/4 cup water 

Heat the oil in a medium saucepan over medium-
low heat. Add the shallots, ginger, garlic, lemongrass, 
and water. Cover; cook until very tender, 8 to 
10 minutes. Uncover; cook until the liquid has evaporated, 
about 1 minute more. Transfer to a food 
processor; puree to form a smooth paste. Refrigerate, 
covered, up to 2 days. 

FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER RECIPE: 137 CALORIES, 9 G FAT, 

0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 13 G CARBOHYDRATE, 11 MG SODIUM, 

2 G PROTEIN, 0 G FIBER 

324 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


halibut and cockles 
in herb broth 

SERVES 4 

1/3 ounce dried porcini mushrooms 

1/4 cup fresh basil leaves, plus 3 tablespoons 
finely chopped 


1/4 cup coarsely chopped fresh chives, 
plus 3 tablespoons finely chopped 


1/4 cup fresh tarragon leaves, 
plus 3 tablespoons finely chopped 


1/4 cup fresh flat-leaf parsley, 
plus 3 tablespoons finely chopped 


1/3 cup extra-virgin olive oil 

Coarse salt 
3 cups fish stock 


1 pound cockles or clams, scrubbed 

4 Pacific halibut, striped bass, or 
Pacific cod fillets (about 11/2 pounds 
total), skinned, bones removed 


Freshly ground pepper 

1. Cover mushrooms with boiling water. Let stand 
until softened, about 3 minutes. Drain, and finely 
chop; set aside. 
2. Put 1/4 cup of each of the herbs into a food processor; 
set aside. Stir together remaining 3 tablespoons 
of each of the herbs, the mushrooms, oil, and 1/2 teaspoon 
salt in a medium bowl; set aside. 
3. Bring stock to a boil in a medium pot. Reduce 
heat to medium-low; add cockles. Cover; cook until 
cockles open, about 2 minutes. Discard any that do 
not open. Using a slotted spoon, transfer cockles to 
a bowl, and cover. (Keep heat on). 
4. Season both sides of fish with salt and pepper. 
Add to stock. Cover; cook, carefully turning once, 
until center is opaque, 2 to 3 minutes per side. Using 
a slotted spatula, transfer fish to a plate, and cover. 
5. Bring stock to a boil. Pour half the stock into a 
food processor with herbs; puree (be very careful 
with hot liquid). Add to remaining stock; pour 
through a fine sieve into a medium bowl, pressing 
on herbs; discard herbs. Divide fish and cockles 
among bowls. Ladle broth into bowls; top fish with 
reserved herb mixture. 
grilled bacon-wrapped 
whitefish 

SERVES 12 

Olive oil, for brushing 

2 whole Great Lakes whitefish or striped 
bass (about 3 pounds each), cleaned 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

4 lemons (3 cut into  -thick rounds; 
1 cut into   pieces, for serving) 


1 bunch fresh thyme, plus sprigs for garnish 

20 strips bacon (about 1 pound) 

1. Preheat a grill to high (if using a charcoal grill, 
the coals are ready when you can hold your hand 5 
inches above grill for just 2 seconds). Brush 2 large 
fish-grilling baskets with oil. Using a sharp knife, 
make diagonal slits (in serving-size portions) along 
both sides of fish. Season both sides with salt and 
pepper. Reserve 6 to 8 lemon rounds and a few 
sprigs of thyme; place remaining lemon rounds and 
thyme inside fish cavities. 
2. On a large cutting board, lay 2 bacon slices end 
to end, slightly overlapping; repeat with 6 more 
slices, laying pairs parallel to one another, 1 inch 
apart. Center 1 bacon slice at top and bottom, 1 inch 
apart from and parallel to overlapping slices. Lay 
fish over bacon, placing head and tail on single 
slices. Wrap fish in bacon, and secure with toothpicks. 
Tuck a few reserved thyme sprigs under 
bacon. Place fish in basket. Repeat with remaining 
fish, bacon, and thyme. 
3. Grill fish, covered, turning once, until opaque 
throughout, about 10 minutes per side. Transfer to 
a platter. Grill reserved lemon rounds until lightly 
charred. Garnish fish with thyme, grilled lemon 
slices, and lemon pieces. 
FISH AND SHELLFISH 325 


spicy mussels and chorizo 

SERVES 4 

3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

1 large shallot, minced 

2 garlic cloves, thinly sliced 
1/4 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes 

2 cups dry white wine 

3 cups canned crushed tomatoes with juice 

1 teaspoon coarse salt 
Freshly ground pepper 
2 pounds mussels, scrubbed and debearded 
1/3 cup coarsely chopped fresh flat-
leaf parsley 

1. Heat oil in a large, heavy stockpot over medium 
heat. Add shallot; cook, stirring occasionally, until 
soft, about 3 minutes. Add garlic and red pepper 
flakes; cook, stirring occasionally, 3 minutes. Add 
wine; bring to a boil. Add tomatoes and chorizo. Reduce 
heat, and simmer, stirring occasionally, 15 minutes. 
Season with salt and pepper. 
2. Add mussels. Cover, and continue to cook, shaking 
pot occasionally, until mussels open, about 10 
minutes (discard any unopened ones). Add parsley; 
toss. Serve immediately. 
326 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


meatless 


main dishes 



sesame-marinated 
tofu with vegetables 

SERVES 4 

You can substitute Chinese broccoli with broccolini 
or dark, leafy greens such as kale, turnip, or 
mustard greens. Before marinating the tofu, press 
it as described in step 1 to remove excess moisture. 

for the tofu 

16 ounces extra-firm tofu 
1 teaspoon Dijon mustard 


3 to 4 teaspoons toasted sesame seeds 
1 teaspoon black sesame seeds (optional) 


1 garlic clove, minced 
3 tablespoons low-sodium tamari soy sauce 

for the stir-fried vegetables 

31/2 teaspoons canola oil 

1 tablespoon freshly minced ginger 
2 garlic cloves, minced 


12 shiitake mushrooms (about 4 ounces), 
stems removed, quartered 


1 red bell pepper, ribs and seeds removed, 
sliced into   strips 


12 ounces Chinese broccoli (2 small 
bunches), cut crosswise into   pieces 


4 scallions, sliced crosswise into 
  pieces 


2 teaspoons low-sodium tamari soy sauce 
1/2 teaspoon toasted sesame oil 


Freshly ground black pepper 

1. Press the tofu: Slice the tofu into   slabs, and 
place in a single layer on a baking sheet lined with 
cheesecloth or paper towels. Cover with another 
layer of cheesecloth or paper towels, and place another 
baking sheet or plate on top. Weight evenly 
with canned goods or other heavy items. Let stand 
about 30 minutes. Drain off the liquid, and pat the 
tofu dry with paper towels. 
2. In a large shallow dish, combine the mustard, 
sesame seeds, garlic, and soy sauce. Place the tofu 
in the dish, and turn once to coat evenly with the 
marinade. Let marinate at least 20 minutes at room 
temperature while preparing the ingredients for the 
stir-fry. 
3. Heat a 1  nonstick saute pan or a wok over 
medium-high heat, and add 11/2 teaspoons canola 
oil to the pan, swirling to coat. Add the tofu; cook 
until lightly browned on each side, about 11/2 minutes 
per side. Transfer the tofu to a platter; cover 
loosely with aluminum foil to keep warm. 
4. In the same pan or wok, heat the remaining 2 teaspoons 
canola oil. Add the ginger and garlic; cook, 
stirring constantly, until aromatic, about 30 seconds. 
Add the mushrooms, red pepper, Chinese 
broccoli, and scallions; cook, stirring constantly, 
until the vegetables are crisp-tender and bright, 
about 7 minutes. Add the soy sauce and sesame oil, 
and stir to combine. Season with pepper, and serve 
immediately, spooned over the tofu. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 191 CALORIES, 10 G FAT, 

0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 13 G CARBOHYDRATE, 655 MG SODIUM, 

14 G PROTEIN, 5 G FIBER 

broiled black pepper tofu 

SERVES 4 

Grocery stores often carry several kinds of tofu, 
so be sure to buy the firm variety for this dish. 
Pressing the tofu removes excess water and allows 
it to soak up the peppery marinade. 

11/2 blocks firm tofu (from 2 14-ounce 
packages) 

2 tablespoons tamari soy sauce 

1 tablespoon toasted sesame oil 

3/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 
Soy-Lemon Dipping Sauce 
(recipe follows) 


1. Cut the tofu crosswise into 6 slices (about 3/4 inch 
thick each). Cut each slice diagonally into 2 triangles. 
Line a rimmed baking sheet with a double 
layer of paper towels. Place the tofu on top, and 
cover with another double layer of paper towels. 
328 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


Place another baking sheet or a large plate on top. 
Weight with heavy objects (such as large cans of 
food); let stand 20 minutes. 

2. Preheat the broiler, with a rack 6 inches from the 
heat. Stir together the tamari soy sauce, oil, and pepper 
in a 9 x 1  baking dish. Pat the tofu dry 
with paper towels; transfer to the baking dish. Turn 
to coat both sides with the marinade. Broil, flipping 
once, until golden brown, about 4 minutes per side. 
Serve with dipping sauce. 
soy-lemon dipping sauce 

MAKES 1/2 CUP 

Tamari soy sauce is similar to regular soy sauce 
but is slightly thicker and has a richer flavor. It is 
available at most grocery stores. Besides being 
the perfect condiment for the tofu, this sauce 
makes a nice addition to the soba noodles-just 
drizzle a little bit on top. 

2 tablespoons minced peeled fresh ginger 

1/4 cup tamari soy sauce 

1/2 teaspoon freshly grated lemon zest, 
plus 1 tablespoon plus 2 teaspoons fresh 
lemon juice (1 lemon total) 


1 teaspoon toasted sesame oil 

Whisk together ginger, tamari soy sauce, lemon 
zest, lemon juice, and sesame oil in a small bowl. 
Set aside at room temperature until ready to serve. 
Just before serving, stir well. 

ABOUT TOFU 

Tofu comes in two types: silken, also known 
as Japanese, and regular, or Chinese. Both 
are available in soft, firm, and extra-firm 
consistencies, and both can be found in most 
grocery stores in the refrigerated section. 
(You may have to look in the Asian foods section 
for silken.) 

The difference between types of tofu lies in 
their texture; what separates soft, firm, and 
extra-firm are their levels of moisture, with 
soft containing the most water, and extra-
firm the least. Regular tofu has a firmer texture 
than silken, regardless of water content. 
For soups and sauces, soft tofu works best, 
while firm or extra-firm are better for 
grilling and frying and should hold their 
shape no matter what dish you cook them in. 

Silken tofu is smooth, creamy, and custard-
like; it works well in pureed dishes, such as 
salad dressings, smoothies, and puddings. 
Keep in mind that silken tofu is always softer 
than regular. An extra-firm silken tofu is still 
creamier than the soft variety of regular tofu. 

Regular tofu also requires pressing before 
frying or roasting in order to remove some of 
the liquid and allow the tofu to better absorb 
flavors. To do this, cut the tofu into the desired 
shape and size. Line a baking sheet 
with paper towels, and place the cut tofu on 
top. Cover the tofu with another layer of 
paper towels, followed by a second baking 
sheet. Weight the top of the baking sheet with 
a heavy skillet or canned goods, and let sit, 
pressing out excess liquid, 20 to 30 minutes. 

When storing tofu, be sure to submerge it in 
cool water. Keep it in a well-sealed container 
in the refrigerator, up to 3 days, changing the 
water every day. 

MEATLESS MAIN DISHES 329 


thai green curry 
with tofu and vegetables 


SERVES 2 TO 4 

2 tablespoons vegetable oil 

4 garlic cloves, minced 

3 tablespoons Green Curry Paste 
(recipe follows) 


8 ounces green beans or Chinese 
long beans, trimmed and cut diagonally 
into 1  pieces 


1 pound zucchini (about 2 medium), 
cut into 1/2 x   sticks 


3/4 cup homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought vegetable stock 
1/4 cup canned unsweetened coconut milk 

3 fresh or frozen kaffir lime leaves 
2 tablespoons Asian fish sauce 


1 teaspoon palm or granulated sugar 

1 tablespoon fresh lime juice 

1 package (14 ounces) extra-firm tofu,
drained and cut into   cubes 


4 cups cooked jasmine or basmati rice, 
for serving 


Fresh purple, Thai, or regular basil 
leaves; fresh bean sprouts; and lime 
wedges, for garnish 


1. Heat the oil in a large saute pan over medium 
until hot but not smoking. Cook the garlic, stirring, 
until just starting to brown, 1 to 2 minutes. Add the 
curry paste; cook, stirring, until fragrant, about 1 
minute. Add the green beans and zucchini; cook, 
stirring, until starting to soften, about 5 minutes. 
2. Stir in the stock, coconut milk, and lime leaves. 
Bring to a simmer; cook, stirring occasionally, until 
the liquid is slightly thickened, about 6 minutes. 
Stir in the fish sauce, sugar, and lime juice. Simmer 
1 minute. 
3. Stir in the tofu, and reduce heat to medium-low. 
Cover, and cook until the vegetables are tender and 
the tofu is heated through, about 4 minutes. Serve 
immediately over rice, garnished with basil, bean 
sprouts, and lime wedges. 






green curry paste 

MAKES 11/2 CUPS 

2 cups coarsely chopped fresh cilantro 
(leaves and stems) 
2 fresh lemongrass stalks, bottom 4 inches 
only, thinly sliced 
1/3 cup fresh Thai or regular basil leaves 
5 scallions, white and pale-green 
parts only, chopped 
1/3 cup fresh lime juice (about 2 limes) 
2 fresh green Thai chiles, chopped 
1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon finely grated 
peeled fresh ginger 
2 garlic cloves, chopped 
2 fresh or frozen kaffir lime leaves 
(optional) 
1 teaspoon coarse salt 


Blend all the ingredients in a blender until 
smooth. The paste can be refrigerated, in an airtight 
container, up to 3 days, or frozen up to 3 weeks. 







cheese souffle 

SERVES 6 

4 tablespoons unsalted butter, plus more, 
melted, for the dish 


1 cup finely grated Parmesan cheese, plus 
more for dusting 


1 large shallot, finely chopped 
6 tablespoons all-purpose flour 


11/2 cups milk 
2 tablespoons chopped fresh rosemary 

2 tablespoons chopped fresh thyme 
Generous pinch of freshly grated nutmeg 


Pinch of cayenne pepper 
1 cup grated Gruyere cheese 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

6 large egg yolks plus 8 large egg whites, 
room temperature 


Pinch of cream of tartar (if not using a 
copper bowl) 

330 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F, with a rack in the middle. 
Brush the outer lip of a 2-quart souffle dish with 
melted butter. Tie a sheet of parchment around the 
dish with kitchen twine so it extends 3 inches above 
the rim. Brush the inside of both the dish and the 
collar with melted butter. Dust with Parmesan 
cheese; tap out excess. Chill the dish in the freezer 
15 minutes. 
2. Heat the butter in a medium saucepan over 
medium heat. Add the shallot; cook until soft, 3 to 
4 minutes. Add the flour; cook, whisking, 3 minutes. 
Whisk in the milk, herbs, and spices. Bring to a boil. 
Reduce heat to low; whisk until thick, about 4 minutes. 
Add the cheeses; whisk until melted. Season 
with 1 teaspoon salt and pepper to taste. Pour into 
a bowl; stir in the yolks. 
3. Using a balloon whisk, beat the whites and a 
pinch of salt in a copper bowl to stiff peaks. (Or beat 
with an electric mixer in a stainless-steel bowl with 
cream of tartar.) 
4. Spoon one-third of the whites onto the base. Fold 
them in: Cut through the center of the mixture with 
a large rubber spatula; gently turn the spatula over. 
Rotate the bowl a quarter-turn; continue folding 
in the whites and turning the bowl until mostly 
combined. Fold in the remaining whites, one-third 
at a time. 
5. Pour the mixture into the prepared dish. Bake 
15 minutes. Reduce temperature to 375 degrees F; bake until 
set, 16 to 18 minutes. Remove the collar, and serve 
immediately. 






orange hokkaido squash souffles 

SERVES 4 

If you can't find this squash, use butternut. 

4 tablespoons unsalted butter, plus 
more for the ramekins 


4 tablespoons all-purpose flour, plus 
more for the ramekins 


11/4 cups half-and-half 
3 sprigs thyme 

1 dried bay leaf 
2 shallots, coarsely chopped 


1 cup Roasted Squash Puree, made with 
orange Hokkaido squash (page 444) 


4 large egg yolks 

3/4 teaspoon finely chopped fresh marjoram 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
4 ounces Gruyere cheese, grated on the 
large holes of a box grater 


6 large egg whites 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees  F. Butter 4 12-ounce 
ramekins, and line the bottoms and sides with 
parchment paper. Dust with flour; tap out excess. 
2. In a small saucepan, bring the half-and-half, 
thyme, and bay leaf to a simmer. Remove from heat; 
let stand, covered, 10 minutes. Strain through a fine 
sieve into a small bowl. Cover, and keep warm. 
3. In a medium saucepan, melt the butter over 
medium heat. Add the shallots; cook, stirring, until 
softened, about 3 minutes. Add the flour, and cook, 
stirring, 3 minutes more. Whisking, add the hot halfand-
half in a slow stream; cook, whisking, until the 
mixture has thickened, about 2 minutes. 
4. Place the mixture in the bowl of an electric mixer 
fitted with the paddle attachment. Beat in the 
squash puree, then the egg yolks and marjoram. 
Season with salt and pepper, and fold in the cheese. 
5. In the clean bowl of an electric mixer fitted with 
the whisk attachment, beat the egg whites with a 
pinch of salt just until stiff peaks form. Gently fold 
into the squash mixture in 3 additions. Spoon the 
batter into the ramekins. Bake until the souffles stop 
rising and a cake tester inserted gently in the centers 
comes out clean, 30 to 35 minutes. Serve. 
MEATLESS MAIN DISHES 331 








ricotta cheese torta 

MAKES 1 7-INCH TORTA; SERVES 4 

This delicate torta makes a lovely luncheon dish. 
Served with our Warm Bean, Snap Pea, and 
Tomato Salad (page 173), it is perfect for a springtime 
supper. To drain the ricotta cheese, place it 
in a fine sieve lined with cheesecloth, and set the 
sieve over a deep bowl; let stand at least 1 hour at 
room temperature. 

Vegetable oil cooking spray 

2 to 3 tablespoons fine bread crumbs, 
preferably homemade 


3 large eggs 
1/4 cup chopped fresh flat-leaf parsley 


1 tablespoon chopped fresh marjoram 
1 tablespoon chopped fresh mint 


2 teaspoons finely grated lemon zest 
2 pounds part-skim ricotta, drained 


3/4 teaspoon coarse salt 
Freshly ground pepper 
1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F, with a rack in the center. 
Lightly coat a 7-inch round springform pan with 
cooking spray. Sprinkle with the bread crumbs, 
coating evenly. 
2. In a medium bowl, whisk together the eggs, parsley, 
marjoram, mint, and zest. Add the ricotta and 
salt; season with pepper. Stir to combine. Pour into 
the prepared pan. 
3. Bake until the top is deep golden brown and firm 
to the touch, about 1 hour. 
4. Place the pan on a plate to catch the juices. Let 
stand until the torta pulls away from the sides, about 
10 minutes. Remove from the pan; serve warm or at 
room temperature. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 369 CALORIES, 21 G FAT, 

211 MG CHOLESTEROL, 14 G CARBOHYDRATE, 697 MG 

SODIUM, 30 G PROTEIN, 0 G FIBER 







vegetable biryani 

SERVES 6 

1/2 teaspoon saffron, crumbled 

1/4 cup nonfat milk 

11/2 cups basmati rice, soaked in cold water 
10 minutes and drained 

3 tablespoons canola oil 
2 large onions, thinly sliced 


11/2 teaspoons whole cumin seeds 

3/4 teaspoon ground cardamom 
1 cinnamon stick, broken into 4 pieces 
1/2 teaspoon ground cloves 


1 tablespoon minced fresh ginger 
2 garlic cloves, minced 


3 plum tomatoes (about 1/2 pound), 
peeled, seeded, and chopped 


6 ounces green beans, cut into thirds 
(about 11/2 cups) 


1/2 head cauliflower, cut into florets 
(about 2 cups) 


2 carrots, cut into   pieces 
(about 3/4 cup) 


1 cup cooked or canned chickpeas, 
drained and rinsed 


11/2 teaspoons coarse salt 

1 cup fresh or frozen peas 
2 ounces (about 1/2 cup) cashews 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Combine the saffron 
and milk in a small bowl; set aside. Place the rice in 
a medium saucepan with 11/2 cups cold water. Bring 
to a boil over high heat, stir once, then reduce heat 
to low. Cover and simmer until the rice has absorbed 
all the water, about 20 minutes. 
2. Meanwhile, heat 2 tablespoons oil in a large saute 
pan over medium-high heat. Add the onions; cook, 
stirring, until golden brown and slightly crisp, about 
10 minutes. Remove half the onions from the pan, 
and reserve. Add the remaining tablespoon oil 
along with the spices, ginger, garlic, and tomatoes. 
Cook, stirring, until fragrant, about 2 minutes. 
3. Pour 1 cup water into the pan; bring to a simmer 
over medium-low heat. Add the green beans, cauliflower, 
carrots, chickpeas, and salt; reduce heat to 
a simmer, and cover the pan. Cook until the vegetables 
are crisp-tender, about 10 minutes. Add the 
peas, and cook until bright green, about 2 minutes. 
Remove the pan from the heat. 

4. Place one-third of the rice in a 31/2-quart heavy-
bottomed casserole or baking dish with a tight-
fitting lid. Drizzle half the saffron milk over the rice. 
Using a slotted spoon, transfer half the vegetable 
mixture to the casserole, leaving the liquid behind. 
Place another third of the rice on top; drizzle with 
the remaining saffron milk. Repeat with the remaining 
vegetables and rice. Spread the reserved 
onions over the top; sprinkle with cashews. 
5. Cover, and bake until the casserole is heated 
through and aromatic, about 30 minutes. Remove 
from the oven; let cool slightly before serving. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 430 CALORIES, 14 G FAT, 

0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 67 G CARBOHYDRATE, 516 MG SODIUM, 

12 G PROTEIN, 8 G FIBER 







layered eggplant 
and polenta casserole 


SERVES 6 

Look for precooked polenta logs in the refrigerated 
section of your grocery store. If using fresh 
plum tomatoes, peel them by scoring an X in the 
bottom with a paring knife and plunging them 
into boiling water for several seconds; transfer to 
an ice-water bath, and let cool. Slip off and discard 
the peels and seeds. 

2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

1 yellow onion, cut into   pieces 

4 garlic cloves, minced 

2 pounds fresh or canned plum 

tomatoes, peeled and chopped 

1/4 teaspoon coarse salt 

1 tablespoon balsamic vinegar 

1 tablespoon roughly chopped fresh 
oregano 


3/4 cup loosely packed basil leaves, 
roughly chopped 
Freshly ground pepper 

11/4 pounds medium eggplant, sliced into 
  rounds 

1 16-ounce log precooked polenta, 
sliced into   rounds 


1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees  F, with a rack in the 
upper third. In a medium saucepan, heat 1 tablespoon 
oil over medium heat. Add the onion and garlic, 
and cook, stirring, until soft and lightly golden, 
about 8 minutes. Add the tomatoes and salt, and 
cook, stirring occasionally, until the sauce has thickened, 
about 30 minutes. Stir in the vinegar, oregano, 
and basil; season with pepper. Remove the sauce 
from the heat. 
2. Meanwhile, heat a large cast-iron skillet or grill 
pan over medium heat. Lightly brush the eggplant 
slices with the remaining tablespoon oil. Working 
in batches, lay the slices in skillet in a single layer; 
cook until browned and beginning to soften, 2 to 3 
minutes per side. Transfer to a plate. 
3. Spoon about 1/2 cup tomato sauce into a 9-inchsquare 
baking dish, spreading to coat evenly. 
Arrange the eggplant slices snugly in a single layer. 
Spoon about 1 cup tomato sauce over the eggplant, 
and arrange the polenta rounds in slightly overlapping 
slices on top. Repeat with the sauce and another 
layer of eggplant. Finish by dotting with the 
remaining tomato sauce. 
4. Cover with foil; bake until bubbling and juicy, 
about 30 minutes. Remove the foil; continue baking 
until the sauce is lightly caramelized and the 
eggplant is tender, about 15 minutes more. Remove 
from oven; let cool slightly, and serve. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 156 CALORIES, 3 G FAT, 
0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 30 G CARBOHYDRATE, 343 MG 
SODIUM, 5 G PROTEIN, 7 G FIBER 

MEATLESS MAIN DISHES 333 








curried eggs 

SERVES 5 

4 teaspoons vegetable oil 

1 shallot, minced 
1 garlic clove, crushed 


2 tablespoons grated fresh ginger 

1 can (28 ounces) chopped tomatoes 
with juice 


2 small green chiles, such as jalapeno 
or serrano, finely chopped, plus more 
for garnish 


2 teaspoons ground turmeric 
1/2 teaspoon ground cumin 


3 sprigs cilantro, finely chopped, 
plus more sprigs for garnish 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

5 large eggs 

1. Heat the oil in a large skillet over medium heat. 
Add the shallot, garlic, and ginger; cook until soft, 
5 to 7 minutes. Add the tomatoes and their juice, 
and the chiles, turmeric, cumin, and chopped 
cilantro. Season with salt and pepper. Cook, stirring 
occasionally, until the tomatoes are soft and the 
sauce has thickened, about 15 minutes. 
2. Break 1 egg into a small bowl; slide onto the 
tomato sauce. Repeat with the remaining eggs, arranging 
them around skillet. Cover, and cook until 
the egg whites are just set, 4 to 5 minutes. Remove 
from heat. Season with salt and pepper, and garnish 
with chiles and cilantro. Serve hot.





 
sauteed tofu with bitter greens 

SERVES 4 TO 6 

1 1-pound block extra-firm tofu 

3 tablespoons low-sodium soy sauce 

2 tablespoons toasted sesame oil 

1/2 teaspoon chili paste or Tabasco sauce 
(optional) 


3 tablespoons fresh lime juice 

1 tablespoon grated fresh ginger 

6 garlic cloves, thinly sliced 

2 pounds bitter greens, such as collard, 
mustard, baby bok choy, or dandelion, 
washed, trimmed, and torn into pieces 


1 teaspoon sesame seeds, lightly toasted 
1/4 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes 


1. Cut the tofu in half lengthwise, then cut each 
piece across into 6 slices. Place the tofu on a paper-
towel-lined plate. Cover with more paper towels; 
place another plate on top. Weight with a few soup 
cans. Chill 30 minutes so towels absorb excess water. 
2. In a medium bowl, combine the soy sauce, 
sesame oil, chili paste or Tabasco sauce, if using, 
lime juice, ginger, and garlic. Set aside. Transfer the 
tofu to a medium bowl; toss with half the marinade; 
let sit for 30 minutes. 
3. Heat a nonstick skillet over medium heat. Working 
in batches, arrange the tofu in a single layer in 
the pan. Cook until golden brown, about 2 minutes 
per side. Transfer to a platter; repeat with the remaining 
tofu. Gradually add the greens to the skillet 
with the remaining marinade. Cook, tossing 
occasionally, until the greens are wilted and most 
of the liquid has evaporated, 5 to 8 minutes. Transfer 
to the platter with the tofu. Sprinkle with sesame 
seeds and red pepper flakes; serve. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 223 CALORIES, 271 MG 

CALCIUM, 11 G FAT, 0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 412 MG SODIUM, 

15 G PROTEIN, 1 G FIBER 

334 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 








marinated tofu with 
cold peanut noodles 

SERVES 8 

Drain the noodles well before coating with sauce. 

1 tablespoon coarse salt 

1 8-ounce package soba or other thin 
wheat noodles 


Coconut Peanut Sauce (recipe follows) 
1/4 cup soy sauce 


1/4 cup mirin 
2 tablespoons grated fresh ginger 


2 12.3-ounce packages firm silken tofu 
12 radishes, sliced paper thin 


8 ounces jicama, peeled, cut into  long 
matchsticks 


1 31/2-ounce package pea shoots or sprouts 

1. Bring a large pot of water to a boil, and add salt. 
Add the soba noodles; cook until al dente, 4 to 5 
minutes. Drain into a large colander; rinse with cold 
water until completely cool. Drain well. Transfer the 
noodles to a large bowl; add the peanut sauce to coat. 
2. Combine the soy sauce, mirin, and ginger in a 
bowl. Cut the tofu into 8 pieces; place one on each 
plate. Drizzle with soy mixture. Divide the noodles 
among the plates; top with radishes, jicama, and 
pea shoots. 






coconut peanut sauce 

MAKES ABOUT 1/2 CUP 

1/4 cup coconut milk, well shaken 

2 tablespoons peanut butter 
1 tablespoon soy sauce 


1 tablespoon mirin 

1 (1/2 inch) piece fresh ginger, peeled, 
roughly chopped 


11/2 teaspoons brown sugar 

Place the coconut milk, peanut butter, soy sauce, 
mirin, ginger, and sugar in a small food processor 
or blender; blend until smooth. Serve with the noodles, 
or store in an airtight container in the refrigerator 
for up to 5 days. 

brown rice with tofu, dried 
mushrooms, and baby spinach 

SERVES 6 

11/2 cups short-grain brown rice 

1/2 ounce sliced dried shiitake mushrooms 

8 ounces extra-firm tofu, drained and 
cut into   cubes 


1 tablespoon finely chopped peeled 
fresh ginger 


4 garlic cloves, minced 

1 dried red chile, crumbled 
1/4 teaspoon coarse salt 


3 ounces baby spinach (about 41/2 cups) 

1/2 cup finely chopped scallions (about 6), 
white and pale-green parts only 


1/4 cup loosely packed fresh cilantro, 
finely chopped 


2 tablespoons plus 1 teaspoon low-sodium 
soy sauce 


11/2 tablespoons rice-wine vinegar 

1 teaspoon toasted sesame oil 

1. Stir together rice, 3 cups water, the mushrooms, 
tofu, ginger, garlic, chile, and salt in the bowl of a 
rice cooker. Cover with lid, and cook until machine 
switches to the warm setting (about 45 minutes). 
Let rice stand 15 minutes to finish steaming. 
2. Stir in spinach. Cover, and let steam 1 minute with 
machine still on warm. Stir in scallions, cilantro, soy 
sauce, vinegar, and sesame oil. Serve immediately. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 222 CALORIES, 3 G FAT, 

0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 42 G CARBOHYDRATE, 305 MG 

SODIUM, 8 G PROTEIN, 3 G FIBER 

MEATLESS MAIN DISHES 335 








stuffed swiss chard 

SERVES 4 TO 6 

3 large bunches Swiss chard 

Coarse salt 
3 tablespoons unsalted butter 


2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

2 small leeks, white and pale-green parts 
only, trimmed, finely chopped, and well 
washed 


6 medium scallions, white and pale-green 
parts only, thinly sliced crosswise 


Freshly ground pepper 
6 tablespoons pine nuts, toasted 


3 cups cooked short-grain brown rice 
11/4 cups finely grated aged provolone 

6 tablespoons fresh ricotta cheese 

3/4 cup fresh bread crumbs 
Fresh Tomato Sauce (recipe follows) 

1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Choose 12 large chard 
leaves (each should be about 10 inches long and 
5 inches wide) or 24 smaller leaves; set aside. 
Coarsely chop enough of the remaining leaves to 
make 41/2 cups; reserve remaining leaves for another 
use. Bring a large pot of water to a boil; add a pinch 
of salt. Blanch whole leaves, 1 at a time, until tender 
and bright green, about 5 seconds. Lay flat on 
a baking sheet lined with paper towels to drain. 
2. Melt butter with oil in a medium skillet over 
medium heat. Add leeks, scallions, 2 teaspoons salt, 
and 1/4 teaspoon pepper. Cook, stirring occasionally, 
until translucent, about 3 minutes. Add chopped 
chard, and cook, stirring occasionally, until chard 
has wilted, about 3 minutes more. Transfer to a 
medium bowl, and add pine nuts; let stand until 
cool. Stir in rice, cheeses, and bread crumbs. Season 
with salt and pepper. 
3. Place a blanched leaf facedown on a work surface. 
Cut out thickest part of stalk, about one-third 
of the way up leaf; slightly overlap the cut ends. If 
using smaller leaves, overlap 2 leaves so they are 
about 10 x 5 inches. Spoon 1 cup filling about one-
third of the way up leaf. Fold bottom of leaf over 
mixture. Fold in sides. Roll to enclose filling completely, 
creating a 3 x   bundle. Repeat with 
remaining leaves and filling. 
4. Transfer to a 9 x 1  baking dish. Tent with 
foil. Bake until heated through, about 15 minutes. 
Spoon warm sauce onto plates; serve 2 or 3 bundles 
per plate. 
fresh tomato sauce 

MAKES ABOUT 21/2 CUPS 

3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
3 garlic cloves, minced 
2 pounds ripe tomatoes, coarsely chopped 
2 teaspoons coarse salt 


1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 

1. Heat oil in a medium, straight-sided skillet over 
medium heat. Add garlic, and cook until fragrant, 
about 30 seconds. Stir in tomatoes, salt, and pepper. 
Cook, stirring occasionally, until tomatoes are 
soft, about 10 minutes. 
2. Remove from heat, and let stand 10 minutes. Pass 
through the medium disk of a food mill. The sauce 
can be refrigerated in an airtight container up to 
3 days. Reheat before serving. 
336 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 








tortilla casserole 
(budin azteca) 

SERVES 8 TO 10 

4 fresh poblano chiles 

18 corn tortillas (6 inches each), halved 
7 tablespoons vegetable oil 


10 ounces spinach, tough stems removed 
Coarse salt 


1 small onion, thinly sliced 
4 garlic cloves, minced 


2 cans (15 ounces each) black beans, 
drained 


1 cup Mexican crema or sour cream, 
plus more for serving 


21/4 cups Tomatillo Salsa (recipe follows), 
plus more for serving 

11/2 cups (8 ounces) grated queso 
fresco or Monterey Jack cheese, or a 
combination 

1. Place chiles directly over the flame of a gas-stove 
burner on high heat. Roast chiles, turning with 
tongs, until blackened all over. (Alternatively, broil 
chiles on a baking sheet, turning, until skin has 
charred.) Transfer to a bowl, and cover immediately 
with plastic wrap. Set aside to steam, about 15 minutes. 
Peel chiles; discard skins. Remove stems, 
seeds, and ribs; cut chiles into 1 x   strips. 
Transfer to a nonreactive bowl. 
2. Preheat the oven to 425 degrees F. Brush tortilla halves 
on both sides with 3 tablespoons oil. Arrange on 
baking sheets. Bake, rotating sheets halfway 
through, until tortillas begin to bubble (before becoming 
crunchy), 5 to 7 minutes. Set aside. Reduce 
oven temperature to 350 degrees F. 
3. Heat a large skillet over medium heat. Wash 
spinach, and drain but do not dry. Add spinach to 
skillet. Cover, and cook until spinach has wilted, 
about 2 minutes. Season with 1/4 teaspoon salt. 
Transfer to a cutting board; let cool slightly. Squeeze 
out liquid. Coarsely chop, and set aside. 
4. Heat 2 tablespoons oil in a medium skillet over 
medium heat. Add onion and 1/2 teaspoon salt; cook, 
stirring occasionally, until translucent, about 3 minutes. 
Stir in chiles; cook until heated through, about 
1 minute. Transfer to a bowl. 
5. Heat remaining 2 tablespoons oil in same skillet. 
Add garlic, and cook, stirring, 30 seconds. Add 
beans and 1/2 teaspoon salt; cook, mashing slightly 
with the back of a wooden spoon, 2 minutes. Transfer 
to a bowl; set aside. 
6. Line bottom of a 10 -round, 21/2- to  deep 
baking dish with 12 tortilla halves, overlapping 
slightly. Layer with chile mixture, half the bean mixture, 
and half the crema. Spread 3/4 cup salsa over 
top. Sprinkle with 1/2 cup cheese. Repeat for second 
layer, using spinach instead of the chiles. Top with 
remaining tortillas, 3/4 cup salsa, and 1/2 cup cheese. 
7. Bake until heated through, 45 minutes to 1 hour; 
cover with foil for last 15 minutes if browning too 
quickly or becoming too dry. Let stand 15 minutes 
before serving. Serve with more salsa and crema. 






tomatillo salsa 

MAKES ABOUT 5 CUPS 

2 tablespoons vegetable oil 
1 small onion, finely chopped (about 3/4 cup) 
3 garlic cloves, coarsely chopped 

21/4 pounds tomatillos, husked and washed 
1 fresh serrano chile, stemmed and seeded 
for less heat if desired 

2 tablespoons coarsely chopped 
fresh cilantro 


1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 

1. Heat oil in a medium saucepan over medium 
heat. Add onion and garlic; cook, stirring occasionally, 
1 minute. Stir in tomatillos, 1 cup water, 
and the chile. Bring to a boil. Reduce to a simmer. 
Cover, and cook, stirring occasionally, until tomatillos 
have softened, about 15 minutes. Drain, reserving 
3/4 cup cooking liquid. Let cool slightly. 
2. Working in batches, puree tomatillo mixture in 
a food processor with reserved cooking liquid. Add 
cilantro and salt; pulse to combine. The salsa can 
be refrigerated in an airtight container up to 3 days. 
MEATLESS MAIN DISHES 337 








zucchini stuffed with 
chickpeas and israeli couscous 

SERVES 6 

6 small zucchini (6 to 7 inches long; 
6 ounces each), halved lengthwise 


Coarse salt 
2 tablespoons unsalted butter 


1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil 
1 shallot, very thinly sliced into rings 


2 teaspoons minced peeled fresh ginger 

1 medium fresh jalapeno pepper, seeded 
and finely chopped 


1/2 teaspoon ground cumin 
1/2 teaspoon ground coriander 


Pinch of ground cinnamon 
Pinch of saffron 


3/4 cup cooked dried or canned chickpeas 
3/4 cup Israeli couscous 
2 tablespoons finely chopped fresh flat-leaf 
parsley, plus sprigs for serving 

1 tablespoon finely chopped fresh cilantro, 
plus sprigs for serving 

Lemon wedges, for serving 

1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Set a wire rack on a 
rimmed baking sheet. Pour 1 cup water onto sheet; 
set aside. Using a small spoon, scoop out pulp from 
center of each zucchini, leaving a  -thick shell. 
Transfer pulp to a kitchen towel, and squeeze out 
excess liquid. Coarsely chop pulp; set aside. Sprinkle 
zucchini shells with 1 teaspoon salt. Place shells, 
cut side down, on paper towels to drain. 
2. Melt butter with oil in a medium saucepan over 
medium-high heat. Add shallot, ginger, and 
jalapeno. Cook, stirring, 1 minute. Stir in 11/2 teaspoons 
salt, the cumin, coriander, cinnamon, and 
saffron. Cook until fragrant, about 30 seconds. Add 
zucchini pulp and chickpeas; cook, stirring occasionally, 
2 minutes. 
3. Stir in 1 cup water. Bring to a boil. Add couscous, 
and return to a boil. Reduce to a simmer. Cover, and 
cook, stirring occasionally, until liquid has absorbed 
and couscous is tender, about 9 minutes. Remove 
from heat, and let stand, covered, 5 minutes. Stir 
in parsley and cilantro. Season with salt, if desired. 
4. Wipe zucchini shells to remove any liquid. 
Lightly season with salt. Mound about 1/4 cup filling 
into each zucchini shell. Transfer to prepared 
rack. Cover with foil, and bake until zucchini are 
tender and filling is heated through, 20 to 25 minutes. 
Serve with parsley, cilantro, and lemon. 






tortilla espanola 

SERVES 8 TO 12 AS HORS D'OEUVRES, 

4 TO 6 AS A MAIN COURSE 

1 cup extra-virgin olive oil 

3 medium russet potatoes 
(about 13/4 pounds total), peeled and 
cut into  -thick slices 


1 medium onion, halved lengthwise and cut 
into  -thick slices 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
7 large eggs 


1. Heat oil in a 10-inch nonstick slope-sided skillet 
or omelet pan over medium heat. Toss together potatoes, 
onion, and 1 teaspoon salt in a medium bowl. 
Add to warm oil; cover, and cook, stirring occasionally, 
until potatoes are tender, about 12 minutes 
(do not let the onion brown). Pour into a sieve set 
over a medium bowl; set oil aside. 
2. Lightly beat eggs in a medium bowl with 1 teaspoon 
salt and 1/4 teaspoon pepper. Add potato mixture, 
and let stand, stirring occasionally, 10 minutes. 
3. Heat 2 teaspoons reserved oil in clean skillet over 
medium heat. Add egg-and-potato mixture; cook, 
pulling cooked egg away from sides with a rubber 
spatula to let raw egg flow underneath, until bottom 
is set and just pale golden (and top is almost 
set), 5 to 7 minutes. Place a plate, upside down, over 
skillet (use a plate with a diameter larger than the 
skillet); invert tortilla onto the plate. 
4. Add 1 teaspoon reserved oil to skillet; swirl to 
coat. Slide tortilla, uncooked side down, back into 
skillet. If any potatoes slip out from bottom, tuck 
them back in. Cook, pressing down on tortilla with 
spatula and tucking in edges to shape sides, until 
completely cooked through, 4 to 6 minutes more. 
Slide onto a cutting board. Let cool slightly. Serve 
warm or at room temperature, cut into wedges. 
338 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


side dishes 









lighter mashed potatoes 

SERVES 8 

16 ounces small-curd low-fat cottage cheese 

2 pounds small red potatoes, halved if large 
Coarse salt 

1/4 teaspoon freshly ground white pepper 

2 tablespoons finely chopped fresh chives, 
plus stems for garnish 


2 tablespoons unsalted butter, softened 
2 tablespoons skim milk 


1. Puree half of the cottage cheese in a blender; set 
aside. Cover potatoes with water by 1 inch in a 
medium saucepan. Add a large pinch of salt. Bring 
to a boil. Reduce to a simmer, and cook until tender, 
about 15 minutes. Drain. 
2. Transfer potatoes to a large bowl. Add cottage 
cheese, pepper, chives, butter, and milk. Season with 
salt. Mash to desired consistency. Serve garnished 
with chives. 






sauteed brussels sprouts 
with raisins 

SERVES 4 

Brussels sprouts are members of the cabbage 
family. They are in season from late August 
through March. 

1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil 

10 ounces Brussels sprouts (about 25), stems 
trimmed, and thinly sliced 


2 carrots, cut into   pieces 
1/4 cup golden raisins 


1 cup homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken broth 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

Heat the oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Add 
the Brussels sprouts and carrots; saute until the 
sprouts start to turn golden brown, about 3 minutes. 
Add the raisins and chicken broth; continue 
cooking, stirring occasionally, until the sprouts are 
tender when pierced with a paring knife, about 12 

minutes. If the skillet becomes too dry before the 
sprouts are tender, add up to 3 tablespoons water, 
and continue cooking. Remove from heat, and season 
with salt and pepper. Serve hot. 







home fries 

SERVES 6 

We used small potatoes for this recipe. If your 
potatoes are larger, adjust the cooking time. 

21/2 pounds small Yukon Gold potatoes 
Coarse salt 

3/4 pound thick-sliced bacon, cut into   
pieces 
1 small red bell pepper, cut into   dice 

1 small yellow bell pepper


1 red onion (about 10 ounces), cut into


1 tablespoon fresh thyme leaves 

2 tablespoons roughly chopped fresh flat- 
leaf parsley 


Freshly ground black pepper 

1. Place the potatoes in a medium saucepan. Cover 
with water; bring to a boil over high heat. Salt the 
water. Reduce heat to medium-high; cook until the 
potatoes have softened but are still slightly firm, 12 
to 15 minutes. Drain in a colander. When cool 
enough to handle, peel the potatoes; cut into   
pieces. Set aside. 
2. Cook the bacon in a large skillet set over medium 
heat until all the fat has been rendered and the 
bacon is crisp and brown, about 15 minutes. Remove 
the bacon with a slotted spoon; set aside on a paper 
towel to drain. Pour off all but 2 tablespoons of the 
bacon fat. Add the reserved potatoes; cook over 
medium heat, stirring occasionally, until golden on 
all sides, about 10 minutes. Add the reserved bacon, 
peppers, onion, and thyme; cook until the vegetables 
have softened, 5 to 7 minutes. Stir in the parsley, 
and season with salt and pepper. Remove from 
heat, and serve. 
340 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 








mashed plantains 

SERVES 4 

You will need sweet, fully ripened plantains 
(pltanos maduros, in Spanish) for this Cuban-
inspired side dish. They are soft, with peels that 
are mostly brown or black, and are available in 
Latin-American markets and many grocery 
stores. 

2 fully ripe plantains, peeled and 
halved lengthwise 


1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 

Pinch of cayenne pepper, or more to taste 
1 tablespoon olive oil 

Juice of 1/2 lime 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Sprinkle the plantains 
with salt and cayenne; drizzle with the oil to coat. 
Arrange, cut sides down, on a rimmed baking sheet. 
Roast until the cut sides of the plantains begin to 
caramelize, about 20 minutes. Turn the plantains; 
roast 10 minutes more. 
2. Mash the hot plantains on the baking sheet with 
a potato masher until somewhat smooth (some 
large chunks should remain). Transfer to a serving 
bowl, and drizzle with the lime juice. 
apple charoset 

MAKE ABOUT 31/2 CUPS 

2 Granny Smith apples, peeled, cored, and 
quartered 


2 Gala apples, peeled, cored, and quartered 

1 cup chopped walnuts, toasted 
1 teaspoon ground cinnamon 


1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon honey 
1/4 cup kosher sweet red wine 


Chop the apples in a food processor. Stir with the 
remaining ingredients in a bowl. The charoset can 
be refrigerated, covered, up to 4 hours. 







southern green beans 

SERVES 8 TO 10 

1 large or 2 small ham hocks 

1 large onion, cut into quarters 
1 small dried red chile (optional) 


8 cups water 
1 tablespoon sugar 


2 pounds green beans, ends trimmed 

Coarse salt and freshly ground 
black pepper 


1. Place the ham, onion, and dried pepper, if using, 
in a medium saucepan; add the water. Bring to a 
boil over medium-high heat, and reduce to a gentle 
simmer; cover, and cook 2 hours. 
2. Using a slotted spoon or spatula, transfer the ham 
and onion to a plate, and set aside; discard the dried 
pepper. Return the liquid to a boil over medium-
high heat; cook, stirring occasionally, until the liquid 
is reduced to 2 cups, about 45 minutes. 
3. Meanwhile, shred any meat from the ham hock 
with a fork, and return it to the saucepan. Add the 
sugar, stirring until dissolved. Reduce heat to 
medium; add the green beans, and simmer, stirring 
occasionally, until the beans are cooked through 
and most of the liquid has evaporated, about 8 minutes. 
Remove from heat, and season with salt and 
black pepper. Transfer to a serving dish. Serve hot. 






butternut squash 
with brown butter 


SERVES 4 

The easiest way to peel butternut squash is with a 
vegetable peeler; the harp-shaped variety works 
particularly well. 

2 tablespoons unsalted butter 

1 butternut squash (about 13/4 pounds),
peeled, seeded, and cut into   cubes 


1/2 cup homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken broth 


1/4 cup water 
1 tablespoon dark-brown sugar 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

SIDE DISHES 341 


1. Heat the butter in a large skillet over medium-
high heat until golden brown. Add the squash; 
saute, stirring occasionally, until golden brown and 
tender when pierced with a fork, about 16 minutes. 
2. Add the chicken broth, water, and brown sugar; 
cook until the liquid has evaporated and the squash 
is nicely caramelized, about 6 minutes. Remove 
from heat, and season with salt and pepper. Serve. 






church street squash 

SERVES 8 TO 10 

This savory dish is named for one of the streets 
in historical Charleston, South Carolina. Crookneck 
squash is a summer squash that is available 
year-round in certain regions. You can substitute 
zucchini or even a winter squash, such as butternut 
or acorn, depending on what's in season in 
your area. 

3 tablespoons unsalted butter 
2 pounds yellow crookneck squash, 
cut into   pieces 
1 large onion, finely chopped 


3/4 cup freshly grated Cheddar cheese 
(3 ounces) 
1 cup sour cream 

1 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/2 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 


1 large egg, lightly beaten 
1/2 teaspoon paprika 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Melt 2 tablespoons 
butter in a large skillet. Add the squash, and cook 
over medium-low heat until tender. Transfer to a 
medium bowl, and mash lightly with a fork. 
2. Melt the remaining tablespoon butter in the same 
skillet. Add the onion, and saute until tender. Add 
to the bowl with the squash. Stir in the cheese, sour 
cream, salt, pepper, and egg. 
3. Transfer to a 2-quart baking dish, and sprinkle 
evenly with the paprika. Bake until golden and bubbling, 
30 to 35 minutes. Remove from the oven. 
Serve hot. 






scalloped mushrooms 

SERVES 8 TO 10 

We used frozen pearl onions, but you could use 
fresh instead. To peel, place them in boiling water 
for 1 minute, and then let them cool slightly before 
slipping off their papery skins. 

9 tablespoons unsalted butter 

1 1-pound bag frozen pearl onions, thawed 
and drained 


3 pounds assorted mushrooms, such as 
button, cremini, or shiitake, trimmed and 
cut in half (large ones quartered) 


3/4 cup heavy cream 
1 cup freshly grated Parmesan cheese 
(4 ounces) 


1 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 


1 cup plain coarse bread crumbs, 
preferably homemade 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Heat 1 tablespoon butter 
in a large cast-iron or ovenproof skillet over 
medium-high heat. Add the onions, and cook until 
soft and just starting to brown, about 5 minutes. 
Transfer to a large mixing bowl. 
2. Working in 4 batches, melt 2 tablespoons butter 
in the same skillet; add one-quarter of the mushrooms, 
tossing to coat evenly with butter. Cook until 
the mushrooms have released their juices and most 
of the juices have evaporated, about 5 minutes. 
Transfer to the bowl with the onions. Repeat the 
process with the remaining butter and mushrooms. 
3. Add the heavy cream, 1/2 cup Parmesan, salt, and 
pepper to the bowl; stir until combined. Return the 
mixture to the skillet, or transfer it to a large baking 
dish. Sprinkle the bread crumbs and remaining 
1/2 cup Parmesan over the top. 
4. Bake until bubbling and nicely golden on top, 
about 25 minutes. Remove from the oven. Serve hot. 
342 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 








edamame succotash 

SERVES 6 

If you can't find fresh edamame (soybeans), 
frozen works just as well. Look for them in the 
freezer section of your grocery store. 

1 pound butternut squash, peeled, seeded, 
and cut into   pieces (about 3 cups) 

2 ounces green beans, sliced on the 
bias into   pieces 


2 teaspoons extra-virgin olive oil 

1 small onion, finely chopped 

1 garlic clove, minced 
1/2 cup homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock, skimmed of fat 
1 cup fresh or frozen corn kernels 


1 cup fresh or frozen shelled edamame 

1 teaspoon roughly chopped fresh thyme 

Pinch of coarse salt 

Freshly ground pepper 

1 tablespoon roughly chopped fresh 
flat-leaf parsley 


1. In a steamer basket set over a pan of simmering 
water, steam the squash until just tender enough to 
be easily pierced with a sharp knife, about 7 minutes. 
Transfer to a plate; set aside. Add the green 
beans to the basket; steam until crisp-tender, about 
3 minutes. Remove from heat; set aside. 
2. In a 10-inch saute pan, heat the oil over medium 
heat. Add the onion and garlic; cook, stirring occasionally, 
until soft and lightly golden, about 3 minutes. 
Add the chicken stock, and bring to a simmer. 
Add the corn and edamame; cook, stirring occasionally, 
until brightly colored and crisp-tender, 
about 3 minutes. 
3. Add the thyme with the steamed squash and 
green beans; cook until heated through, about 
3 minutes, stirring to combine. Season with salt 
and pepper, and sprinkle with the parsley. Serve 
immediately. 
creamed fresh corn 

SERVES 4 

2 tablespoons olive oil 

1 jalapeno pepper, seeded and diced 
8 ears fresh corn, husks and silk 
removed, kernels cut from cobs 
1/4 cup heavy cream 


11/4 cups milk 

3/4 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 

1. Heat the oil in a large saute pan over medium 
heat. Add the jalapeno, and cook 1 minute. Add the 
corn; cook, stirring, until the kernels are tender but 
not browned, about 5 minutes. Remove from heat. 
2. Transfer 11/2 cups cooked corn to a food processor; 
add the cream and milk. Process until the mixture 
is very smooth, about 3 minutes. Pass the 
mixture through a fine sieve into a medium bowl, 
pressing down on the solids to extract as much liquid 
as possible. 
3. Return the strained liquid to the saute pan, and 
stir to combine with the remaining corn mixture. 
Cook over medium heat until the liquid just comes 
to a simmer. Remove from heat, and season with 
salt and pepper. Serve hot. 
SIDE DISHES 343 


quick braised artichokes 

SERVES 4 

If you like, snip the prickly points of the leaves 
with scissors before you cook the artichokes. The 
tender leaves and hearts are delicious dipped in 
Aioli (page 305). 

2 large artichokes 
1 lemon, halved 
6 sprigs thyme 
1 garlic clove, smashed 
2 dried bay leaves 


1/2 teaspoon coriander seeds (optional) 
2 teaspoons coarse salt 
1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil 


1. Cut each artichoke lengthwise into quarters 
through the stem. Using a spoon, remove the fuzzy 
choke from the heart of each quarter, and immediately 
squeeze the juice from one of the lemon halves 
over all artichokes to prevent them from discoloring. 
2. Place all the ingredients, including the remaining 
lemon half, in a large saucepan; fill with enough 
cold water to cover the artichokes. Cover the pan, 
and bring the water to a simmer over high heat. Reduce 
heat to medium-low; cook just until the artichoke 
hearts can be pierced with a fork but are not 
too soft, 10 to 15 minutes. Remove from heat, and 
let the artichokes sit in the cooking liquid until 
ready to serve, up to 10 minutes. Transfer carefully 
to serving plates with a slotted spoon, allowing excess 
liquid to drain off. 
flageolet 

MAKES 2 CUPS 

Flageolet, pale green kidney beans, are prevalent 
in French cooking. Their delicate flavor is well 
suited for simple preparations and is particularly 
good with lamb. 

11/2 cups dried flageolet beans, sorted and 
rinsed well 

8 cups water, plus more for soaking 

1 sprig rosemary 
1 dried bay leaf 


4 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


1. Place the beans in a large stockpot. Cover with 
cold water by 2 inches; let soak overnight in the 
refrigerator. 
2. Transfer the beans to a colander to drain. Return 
to the stockpot; cover with 8 cups water. Add the 
rosemary and bay leaf. Bring to a boil; reduce heat, 
and simmer, covered, until the beans are tender, 
about 1 hour 10 minutes. Transfer to a serving bowl; 
discard the herbs. Gently toss with the oil, and season 
with salt and pepper. Serve. 
swiss chard with olives 

SERVES 4 

Don't worry if your pan seems overcrowded with 
the chard; it will quickly wilt and lose most of its 
volume as it cooks. Cooking the stems a bit 
longer than the leaves will ensure they become 
perfectly tender. If you prefer, seed the jalapeno 
pepper before using. 

2 small bunches (about 11/4 pounds) Swiss 
chard, trimmed and washed 


1 teaspoon olive oil 

1 small yellow onion, sliced 1/4 inch thick 
2 garlic cloves, thinly sliced 


1 jalapeno pepper, finely chopped 

1/3 cup pitted and roughly chopped brine- 
cured olives, such as kalamata (about 16) 


1/2 cup water 

344 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


1. Separate the leaves from the stems of the Swiss 
chard. Roughly chop the leaves, and set aside. Cut 
the stems into   pieces. 
2. In a large skillet or Dutch oven, heat the olive oil 
over medium heat. Add the onion, garlic, and 
jalapeno, and saute until the onion is translucent, 
about 6 minutes. Add the Swiss chard stems, olives, 
and the water; cover, and cook 3 minutes. Stir in the 
Swiss chard leaves; cover, and continue cooking 
until both stems and leaves are tender, about 4 minutes. 
Serve immediately. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 101 CALORIES, 5 G FAT, 

0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 13 G CARBOHYDRATE, 568 MG SODIUM, 

3 G PROTEIN, 2 G FIBER 

sugar snap peas 
with toasted almonds 


SERVES 4 

1/2 cup whole almonds (21/2 ounces) 

3 tablespoons unsalted butter 
1 pound fresh sugar snap peas, ends 
trimmed 
3 tablespoons fresh lemon juice (1 lemon) 


1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 


1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Spread the almonds 
on a baking sheet; place in the oven. Toast until the 
almonds are golden and fragrant, 8 to 10 minutes. 
Remove from the oven; let cool completely. Transfer 
half the almonds to a cutting board, and chop 
coarsely. Place the remaining half in the bowl of a 
food processor fitted with the metal blade; process 
until the almonds are finely chopped, 15 to 20 seconds. 
Add the coarsely chopped almonds, and stir 
to combine. 
2. Melt the butter in a large skillet over medium 
heat. Add the peas, lemon juice, salt, and pepper; 
stir until all the ingredients are well combined and 
heated through, about 2 minutes. Sprinkle with the 
almonds, and toss to coat. Transfer to a serving 
bowl, and serve. 
braised sweet onions 

SERVES 4 

2 sweet onions (medium) 

3 tablespoons olive oil 
1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 


1/8 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 

1 cup homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock 


3 sprigs thyme 
3 sprigs rosemary 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Peel the onions, trim 
the root end, and cut each in half; cut each half into 
3 wedges. Heat the olive oil in a 10-inch cast-iron 
skillet over medium heat. Add the onion wedges, 
and season with salt and pepper; saute until golden 
brown, about 5 minutes on each side. 
2. Add the chicken stock, thyme, and rosemary; 
transfer the pan to the oven. Cook, basting the 
onions periodically with the cooking liquid, until 
the onions are tender and the stock has reduced 
and thickened, 55 to 60 minutes. Remove from the 
oven, and serve. 
glazed baby turnips 
and cipollini onions 


SERVES 6 TO 8 

To peel cipollini onions, immerse in boiling water 
for a few minutes, then remove with a slotted 
spoon. Allow to cool slightly; slip off the skins. 

1 tablespoon unsalted butter 

1 teaspoon sugar 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


3 to 31/2 pounds (about 8 or 9 bunches) baby 
turnips, peeled and trimmed 


3 8-ounce bags cipollini onions, peeled and 
trimmed 


1/2 cup water 

Fresh herbs, for garnish 

1. Melt the butter in a large saucepan over medium-
low heat. Add the sugar; season with salt and pepper. 
Cook until the butter starts to color, about 1 
minute. Add the turnips and onions, swirling the 
SIDE DISHES 345 


pan to evenly coat. Add the water; cover, and cook 
until almost all the water has evaporated and the 
vegetables are glazed, about 20 minutes. 

2. Remove the cover; continue cooking until the liquid 
has evaporated and the vegetables are 
caramelized, 3 to 5 minutes. Season with salt and 
pepper. Transfer to a large serving platter, and garnish 
with fresh herbs. 
white asparagus 
with hollandaise sauce 


SERVES 6 TO 8 

White asparagus spears are generally thicker 
than their green counterparts, so be sure to trim 
the tough ends of the stalk and cook until they 
are perfectly crisp-tender. 

6 quarts water 

3 tablespoons coarse salt 

3 to 4 bunches (3 to 4 pounds) white 
asparagus, peeled and tough ends 
of stalks trimmed by 1 inch 


Hollandaise Sauce (recipe follows) 

Bring the water to a boil in a large stockpot, and 
add the salt. Place the asparagus spears in the water; 
cook just until tender, about 5 minutes. Gently 
transfer to a colander to drain, being careful not to 
damage the tips. Blot dry with paper towels, and 
arrange on a large serving platter. Serve warm with 
hollandaise sauce. 

hollandaise sauce 

MAKES 3 CUPS 

Clarifying the butter is an easy and helpful way 
to achieve perfect hollandaise sauce. 

2 cups (4 sticks) unsalted butter 

6 large egg yolks 

1/3 cup dry white wine 

2 tablespoons water 

2 teaspoons fresh lemon juice 

Coarse salt 

Cayenne pepper (optional) 

1. Clarify the butter: Slowly melt the butter in a 
small saucepan over medium heat, and skim off surface 
foam. Pour the clear layer of butter into a large 
glass measuring cup, leaving behind the milky 
residue, which can be discarded. Let the butter cool 
until it is lukewarm. 
2. Meanwhile, place the egg yolks and wine in a 
heatproof bowl set over a pan of simmering water. 
Whisk vigorously until the mixture is very pale and 
the whisk leaves a trail, 3 to 4 minutes. Remove from 
heat; continue whisking until the mixture is the 
same temperature as the butter, about 30 seconds. 
3. Whisking constantly, add the butter to the egg 
mixture, 1 drop at a time at first and gradually increasing 
to a steady stream. When fully incorporated, 
stir in the water and lemon juice, and season 
with salt and cayenne pepper, if desired. Serve immediately, 
or keep warm over a pan of simmering 
water removed from heat. 
sauteed chicory 

SERVES 4 

This is a quick and delicious side dish for any 
season, as chicory is available year-round. Radicchio, 
a red-leaf chicory, adds a contrasting bitter 
note as well as a splash of color. 

2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

2 anchovy fillets, coarsely chopped 
(optional) 


1 head radicchio (about 10 ounces), 
trimmed and sliced into   pieces 


1 bunch chicory (about 11/2 pounds), 
trimmed and roughly chopped 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
Balsamic vinegar, for drizzling 

Heat the olive oil in a large skillet over medium-
high heat. Add the anchovies, and cook 1 minute. 
Add the radicchio and chicory; saute until slightly 
wilted, 1 to 2 minutes. Season with salt and pepper. 
Transfer to a serving platter, and drizzle with 
balsamic vinegar. 

346 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


fricassee of wild mushrooms 

SERVES 4 

14 ounces chanterelle mushrooms, tough 
ends of stems removed 


5 tablespoons unsalted butter 

1 garlic clove, minced 

1 medium shallot, finely chopped 

7 ounces blue foot or oyster mushrooms, 
tough ends of stems removed 


1 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/2 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 


1 teaspoon fresh lemon juice 
1/3 cup dry white wine 


2 ounces black trumpet mushrooms 
6 tablespoons roughly chopped fresh 
flat-leaf parsley 
3 tablespoons finely chopped fresh chives 


3 tablespoons chopped fresh chervil 

1. Rinse the chanterelles quickly with cold water 
(do not soak) in a colander, and dry thoroughly on 
paper towels. Wipe the other mushrooms with a 
damp paper towel, or if necessary, rinse with cold 
water and dry well on paper towels. 
2. In a large saute pan, melt 3 tablespoons butter 
over medium heat. Add the garlic and shallot; cook 
until the shallot begins to soften, about 1 minute. 
Add blue foot mushrooms; cook, stirring often, until 
the mushrooms wilt, about 4 minutes. Season with 
salt, pepper, and lemon juice. 
3. Add the white wine, and cook until fully evaporated, 
1 to 2 minutes. Add the black trumpet mushrooms, 
parsley, chives, chervil, and remaining 2 
tablespoons butter; cook until the mushrooms wilt, 
1 to 2 minutes. Serve immediately. 
winter greens and bacon 

SERVES 4 

Any combination of kale, chard, and mustard or 
collard greens works well. 

4 slices thick-cut bacon, cut 
into   strips 


1 pound kale, ribs removed, leaves 
torn into   pieces 


1 bunch Swiss chard, ribs removed, 
leaves torn into   pieces 


3/4 cup water 
2 teaspoons apple cider vinegar 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1. In a large skillet over medium heat, cook the 
bacon until browned, about 5 minutes. Remove with 
a slotted spoon, and set aside. Pour off all but 2 tablespoons 
rendered fat. 
2. Add the greens and water to the pan, and bring 
to a boil. Cover, reduce heat, and simmer until the 
greens are wilted and almost all the water has evaporated, 
about 8 minutes. 
3. Remove the greens from the heat. Stir in the vinegar, 
and season with salt and pepper. Toss in the 
bacon. Serve warm. 






carrot, parsnip, and pea gratin 

SERVES 6 

Unsalted butter, for baking dish 

5 large carrots, cut into   pieces 
5 large parsnips, cut into   pieces 


10 ounces frozen peas, thawed 
10 ounces frozen pearl onions, thawed 


1 cup heavy cream 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Butter a 2-quart gratin 
or baking dish. Place the carrots, parsnips, peas, and 
onions in a medium bowl. Pour in the cream; season 
well with salt and pepper. Toss until well combined. 
Pour into the baking dish; bake, stirring 
halfway through, until bubbly and golden brown, 
40 to 50 minutes. Serve immediately. 

SIDE DISHES 347 








roasted baby 
artichokes, asparagus, and 
fennel with olives 


SERVES 6 

1 bunch (12 ounces) asparagus 

2 medium fennel bulbs 
8 baby artichokes 


1 lemon, cut in half 
11/2 cups large green olives, such as Cerignola 

1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil 
2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 


1 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 


1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Trim the ends of the 
asparagus; cut the stalks into   lengths. Place 
in a large bowl; set aside. Trim the leaves from the 
fennel; cut the bulbs in half and into thin wedges. 
Add to the bowl with the asparagus. 
2. Remove and discard any tough outer leaves from 
the artichokes. Cut into quarters; remove and discard 
the purple chokes. Rub the artichokes all over 
with cut lemon to prevent browning; add to the 
bowl with the asparagus. Add the olives, olive oil, 
lemon juice, salt, and pepper; toss to combine well. 
3. Transfer to a roasting pan. Roast until the vegetables 
are tender and just starting to brown, about 
30 minutes. Serve hot or at room temperature. 
provencal roasted tomatoes 

SERVES 8 TO 10 

These tomatoes hold up well for up to 2 days 
when stored in the refrigerator; serve as a sandwich 
filling or pasta topping. 

12 plum tomatoes (about 3 pounds) 

3 garlic cloves, minced 
2 tablespoons finely chopped fresh thyme 


2 tablespoons finely chopped fresh 
flat-leaf parsley 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Fit a wire rack into a 
rimmed baking sheet. Slice each tomato lengthwise 
into 4   slices. Place on the wire rack. 
2. In a small bowl, mix the garlic, thyme, and parsley; 
season with salt and pepper. Divide evenly 
among the tomato slices, spooning about 1/2 teaspoon 
on each. Drizzle the olive oil over the tomatoes. 
Roast until the herb mixture is lightly browned 
and the tomato skins are wrinkled, about 1 hour. 
Transfer the baking sheet to a wire rack to cool. 
Serve. 
saucy black beans 

SERVES 6 TO 8 

1 12-ounce package dried black beans, 
picked over 


3 tablespoons vegetable oil 

1 large white onion, diced 
8 cups cold water 


Peel of 1 orange, pith removed (optional) 

1 jalapeno pepper, sliced in half lengthwise 
and seeded (optional) 

Coarse salt and freshly ground black 

pepper 

Hot pepper sauce, such as Tabasco 

(optional) 

1. Place the beans in a large bowl or stockpot; cover 
with cold water by 2 inches. Let stand at room temperature 
4 hours or overnight. Drain, and rinse the 
beans with cold water; set aside. 
2. Heat the oil in a large saucepan over medium 
heat. Add the onion, and cook until it is soft and 
translucent but not browned, about 8 minutes. Add 
the beans and the cold water, along with the orange 
peel and jalapeno, if desired. Bring to a boil, and reduce 
heat to a gentle simmer; cover, and cook, stirring 
occasionally, until the beans are tender and 
most of the liquid has evaporated, creating a sauce-
like consistency, about 2 hours. Most of the liquid 
should have evaporated. 
3. Remove from heat; remove the orange peel and 
jalapeno, if using. Season with salt, black pepper, 
and hot pepper sauce, if desired. Serve hot or at 
room temperature. 
348 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


brussels sprouts 
with lemon and walnuts 


SERVES 8 

2 pounds Brussels sprouts, stem ends 
trimmed and scored with an X 


3 tablespoons unsalted butter 
1 garlic clove, minced 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
2 teaspoons fresh lemon juice 


1/2 cup walnuts, toasted, coarsely chopped 

1. Bring a large pot of water to a boil; insert a 
steamer rack. Add the Brussels sprouts; steam until 
bright green and just tender, about 7 minutes. 
Transfer to a plate. 
2. Melt the butter in a large skillet over medium 
heat. Add the garlic; cook, stirring, until soft, about 
2 minutes. Stir in the Brussels sprouts; cook until 
warmed through, about 2 minutes. Season with salt 
and pepper. Stir in the lemon juice and walnuts. 
sauteed red cabbage 
with raisins 

SERVES 4 

2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

1 small red cabbage (about 13/4 pounds), 
halved, cored, and thinly sliced crosswise 

2 small shallots, quartered and separated 
into layers (about 4 ounces) 


2 teaspoons coarse salt 

2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 
21/2 teaspoons cider vinegar 

Freshly ground pepper 
1/3 cup raisins 


Heat the oil in a large nonstick saute pan over 
medium-high heat until hot but not smoking. Add 
the cabbage and shallots, and cook, stirring occasionally, 
until the cabbage has softened slightly, 
about 15 minutes. Stir in the salt, lemon juice, and 
vinegar. Season with pepper. Cook until the cabbage 
has wilted and the shallots have softened, 10 
to 12 minutes more. Stir in the raisins; serve. 

tarragon green beans 

SERVES 8 

3 tablespoons unsalted butter 

1 large shallot, finely chopped (1/2 cup) 
2 pounds green beans, trimmed 


1/2 cup dry white wine 

2 tablespoons coarsely chopped fresh 
tarragon, plus sprigs for garnish 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1. Melt the butter in a large, high-sided skillet over 
medium heat. Add the shallot; cook, stirring constantly, 
until soft and translucent, 2 to 3 minutes. 
Add the beans, and gently toss to coat with the shallot 
mixture. Cook, stirring occasionally, 2 minutes. 
2. Add the wine. Raise heat to medium-high; cook, 
stirring often, 12 minutes. Reduce heat to medium, 
and cook until the beans are tender, 3 to 5 minutes 
more. Stir in the tarragon, and season with salt and 
pepper. Garnish with tarragon sprigs. 
braised cabbage 

SERVES 4 

Leeks should be cleaned thoroughly. After slicing, 
place the pieces in a large bowl of cold water. 
Let stand about 10 minutes, then remove them 
with a slotted spoon. 

2 cans (141/2 ounces each) low-sodium 
chicken broth 


1 teaspoon coarse salt 
10 whole black peppercorns 


1 bay leaf 

1 small green cabbage (about 2 pounds), 
cut into 8 wedges 


1 small leek, white and pale-green parts 
only, halved lengthwise and cut crosswise 
into  -thick pieces 


Bring the broth, salt, peppercorns, and bay leaf to 
a boil in a medium pot over medium-high heat. Add 
the cabbage and leek. Cover; reduce heat to 
medium. Simmer until the cabbage is tender, 12 to 
15 minutes. Transfer the cabbage and some of the 
broth to a serving platter. 

SIDE DISHES 349 


glazed carrots with 
whole spices and rosemary 


SERVES 4 TO 6 

2 pounds thin, tender carrots in assorted 
colors, with greens (or regular carrots, 
halved lengthwise) 


Coarse salt 
3 tablespoons packed light-brown sugar 


1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon white-
wine vinegar 


2 tablespoons honey 
1 teaspoon whole pink peppercorns 


2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil, 
plus more (optional) for drizzling 


2 sprigs fresh rosemary 

1 whole star anise 

1. Peel and trim the carrots, leaving 11/2 inches of 
the greens intact. Bring a large pot of water to a boil; 
add 1 tablespoon salt. Add the carrots; cook until 
bright and just tender, 3 to 4 minutes. Immediately 
plunge into an ice-water bath. Drain. 
2. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Whisk together the 
sugar, vinegar, honey, and peppercorns. 
3. Heat the oil in a large ovenproof skillet over 
medium-high heat. Add the carrots, rosemary, and 
star anise; cook, stirring, until the carrots are tender, 
about 5 minutes. Stir in the honey mixture. Season 
with salt. Bring to a boil over medium-high heat, 
turning the carrots to coat. 
4. Transfer the skillet to the oven. Roast the carrots 
until slightly caramelized, 20 to 25 minutes. Drizzle 
with oil, if desired. 
celery root puree 

SERVES 4 AS A SIDE DISH 

1 tablespoon vegetable oil 

2 medium shallots, finely chopped 

Coarse salt and freshly ground 
white pepper 


1 large celery root (about 2 pounds), 
peeled and cut into   chunks 


2 cups milk 

1 bay leaf 
2 garlic cloves, crushed 


Pinch of ground nutmeg 

1. Heat the oil in a medium, heavy-bottomed pot 
over medium heat. Add the shallots; season with 
salt and pepper. Cook, stirring, until translucent, 
about 5 minutes. 
2. Add the celery root, milk, 2 cups water, bay leaf, 
garlic, and nutmeg. Season with salt and pepper. 
Bring to a boil. Reduce heat; simmer until the celery 
root is very tender, about 15 minutes. Let cool. 
3. Discard the bay leaf. Transfer the solids to a 
blender using a slotted spoon. Add 1/4 cup cooking 
liquid. Blend until smooth (add more cooking liquid, 
if needed). Season with salt and pepper. 
sauteed peas and scallions 

SERVES 4 

Cooking peas only briefly-in a little bit of butter- 
lets them retain their flavor, color, and texture. 

2 tablespoons unsalted butter 

3 cups shelled fresh peas or thawed frozen 
peas 


3 scallions, white and pale-green parts only, 
thinly sliced diagonally 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

Melt the butter in a medium skillet over medium-
high heat. Add the peas and scallions. Cook, stirring, 
until heated through, about 3 minutes. Season 
with salt and pepper. 

350 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


roasted fennel with thyme 

SERVES 6 TO 8 

4 large fennel bulbs, trimmed and cut 
into 8 wedges each 


1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil 

3 sprigs fresh thyme, leaves removed and 
stems discarded, plus 3 whole sprigs 


Coarse salt 
1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 


Juice of 1 lemon 

Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Toss together the fennel, 
oil, thyme leaves and sprigs, 1/2 teaspoon salt, 
and the pepper in a large bowl. Spread the fennel 
mixture into a single layer on a rimmed baking 
sheet. Roast the fennel, turning occasionally, until 
browned, 50 to 60 minutes. Drizzle with the lemon 
juice; season with salt. 

collard greens with bacon 

SERVES 8 

2 bunches collard greens, stemmed 

3 tablespoons vegetable oil 
1/2 red onion, sliced 


3 slices bacon


2 tablespoons cider vinegar 

1 cup homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock 


1. Working in batches, stack the greens; cut crosswise 
into  -thick strips. Gather the strips; cut 
crosswise into   pieces. Transfer to a large 
bowl of cold water; swish to remove grit. Transfer 
the greens to a colander using a slotted spoon; let 
drain. Repeat until the greens are free of grit. 
2. Heat the oil in a very large skillet over medium-
high heat. Add the onion and bacon; cook until the 
onion is translucent, about 4 minutes. Add the 
greens; cook, stirring, until the greens begin to wilt 
and are reduced in volume. 
3. Raise heat to high; add the vinegar. Cook, scraping 
up brown bits from the bottom of the skillet, 
until the vinegar has evaporated, about 1 minute. 
4. Add the stock; reduce heat. Simmer, covered, 
until the greens are just tender, 12 to 14 minutes. If 
making ahead, refrigerate, covered; reheat over low. 
baked stuffed red peppers 
with cherry tomatoes, 
feta, and thyme 

SERVES 4 

Filled with tangy feta and a handful of sweet tiny 
tomatoes, red bell peppers take on a Mediterranean 
twist. You can also try other varieties of 
small tomatoes such as grape, currant, or even 
yellow pear in the filling. 

2 small red bell peppers (5 to 6 ounces 
each), halved lengthwise through stem, 
seeds and ribs removed 


1 heaping cup cherry tomatoes 
(about 6 ounces) 


11/2 ounces feta cheese (preferably goat's 
milk), crumbled 

1 teaspoon coarsely chopped fresh thyme 
8 basil leaves, torn into pieces 


Freshly ground pepper 
1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil 


1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F, with the rack in the 
top third. Place the bell pepper halves, cut sides up, 
in a baking dish. Toss together the tomatoes, feta, 
thyme, and basil in a medium bowl; season with 
black pepper. Fill each pepper with tomato and feta 
mixture, dividing evenly. Drizzle each with oil. 
2. Bake the stuffed peppers, covered with aluminum 
foil, until they begin to soften, about 30 minutes. 
Remove the foil; continue to bake until the tomatoes 
begin to burst and the cheese turns light 
brown, 13 to 15 minutes more. Remove the stuffed 
peppers from the oven, and serve warm. 
SIDE DISHES 351 


neapolitan green beans 

SERVES 6 

1 pound green beans, trimmed 

2 garlic cloves, thinly sliced 
1/4 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes 


1 teaspoon coarse salt 

1 medium tomato, cored and torn 
into pieces 


2 to 3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

1 large sprig fresh basil 

1. Rinse and drain the green beans; place in a 
medium saucepan while still slightly wet. Add the 
garlic, red pepper flakes, salt, tomato, and oil. Cover; 
cook over medium-low heat, stirring occasionally, 
until the beans are soft, about 15 minutes. 
2. Add the basil sprig; cook, uncovered, stirring constantly, 
until most of the juices have evaporated, 
about 5 minutes. Transfer the mixture to a serving 
bowl. Discard the basil sprig before serving. 






broccoli with olives 

SERVES 10 

4 bunches broccoli (about 3 pounds), 
cut into medium florets 


1/2 cup extra-virgin olive oil 
1 teaspoon coarse salt 


1/2 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 
1 cup pitted and slivered kalamata olives 


1. Prepare an ice-water bath; set aside. Put the broccoli 
in a steamer basket over boiling water, cover, 
and steam until just tender, about 7 minutes. Briefly 
plunge into the ice-water bath. Drain; pat dry. 
2. Heat 1/4 cup oil in a wide saute pan over medium 
heat. Add half of the broccoli, 1/2 teaspoon salt, and 
1/4 teaspoon pepper; cook, stirring, until golden 
brown, about 5 minutes. Stir in half of the olives. 
Cook until heated through. Transfer to a serving 
dish; cover. Repeat with the remaining oil, broccoli, 
salt, pepper, and olives. Combine batches. Serve 
immediately. 






maple-glazed parsnips 
and carrots 

SERVES 4 TO 6 

11/4 pounds parsnips (about 6), peeled, 
halved lengthwise 

3/4 pound thin carrots (about 12), peeled, 
greens trimmed but not removed 
4 slices bacon, each cut into 4 pieces 

10 sprigs fresh thyme 
1/4 cup pure maple syrup 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

Preheat the oven to 450 degrees F, with the rack in the lower 
third. Place the parsnips, carrots, bacon, and thyme 
in a single layer on a rimmed baking sheet. Drizzle 
with the syrup; season with salt and pepper. Toss 
well to combine. Bake until the bottoms of the vegetables 
begin to caramelize and turn dark brown, 
about 20 minutes. Remove from the oven, and toss 
the vegetables carefully. Return to the oven, and 
bake until all sides are well browned, about 25 minutes 
more. Discard the bacon and thyme. Serve 
immediately. 







creamed spinach 
and pearl onions 

SERVES 4 

11/4 pounds spinach, tough stems discarded, 
leaves rinsed well (do not pat dry) 

10 ounces white pearl onions (21/2 cups) 

5 tablespoons unsalted butter 
2 tablespoons all-purpose flour 


11/4 cups milk 

3/4 cup chopped slab bacon (3 ounces) 
1/2 cup heavy cream 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


Pinch of freshly grated nutmeg 
2 teaspoons fresh lemon juice 


1. Heat a large pot over high heat until hot. Cook 
the spinach (with water still clinging to the leaves) 
in the pot, covered, until beginning to wilt, about 1 
minute. Stir, and cook, covered, 1 minute more. Uncover; 
stir the spinach until completely wilted. 
352 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


2. Transfer the spinach to a colander; rinse under 
cold water. Squeeze dry in a clean kitchen towel. 
Finely chop; set aside. 
3. Bring a medium saucepan of water to a boil. Add 
the onions; cook until the skins soften, about 3 minutes. 
Remove the onions with a slotted spoon (reserve 
the water in the pot); rinse. Trim the root ends, 
and remove the skins. Halve the onions, if large. Return 
the onions to the cooking water. Cook until 
tender, about 10 minutes. Drain, and rinse. 
4. Melt 4 tablespoons butter in a medium saucepan 
over medium heat. Add the flour, and whisk until 
smooth. Whisking constantly, pour in the milk in 
a slow, steady stream. Boil, whisking constantly, 1 
minute. Remove from heat. 
5. Melt the remaining tablespoon butter in a large 
saucepan over medium heat. Add the bacon; cook, 
stirring occasionally, until well browned, about 6 
minutes. Stir in the onions and spinach. Stir in the 
cream and reserved milk mixture. Add 1 teaspoon 
salt, 1/4 teaspoon pepper, and nutmeg. Cook, stirring, 
until heated through and thick, about 10 minutes 
(do not boil). Stir in the lemon juice. Season with 
salt and pepper. 






baked creamed salsify 

SERVES 4 TO 6 

1/4 cup plus 1 teaspoon fresh lemon juice 
(about 2 lemons) 


2 pounds salsify 
Coarse salt 


11/2 tablespoons unsalted butter 
1/2 cup heavy cream 

Pinch of freshly grated nutmeg 
Freshly ground pepper 


1/4 cup fresh bread crumbs, lightly toasted 
1/4 cup freshly grated Parmesan cheese 


1. Preheat the oven to 425 degrees F, with the rack in the 
highest position. Fill a large bowl two-thirds full 
with cold water; add 1/4 cup lemon juice. Trim the 
salsify, and peel with a vegetable peeler, transferring 
the salsify to lemon water as you work. Cut the 
salsify into   lengths; return to bowl. Drain. 
2. Cover the salsify with cold water by 2 inches in 
a medium saucepan; add 1/2 teaspoon salt. Bring to 
a boil. Reduce heat to medium-high. Cook until tender 
but not mushy, 10 to 15 minutes; drain. 
3. Melt the butter in a medium saucepan over 
medium heat. Stir in the salsify. Stir in the cream 
and remaining teaspoon lemon juice. Bring to a 
bare simmer; remove from heat. Add the nutmeg, 
and season with salt and pepper. Pour the salsify 
mixture into an 8-inch-square baking dish or 8-cup 
gratin dish. Sprinkle with the bread crumbs and 
cheese. Bake until golden brown, about 20 minutes. 
roasted radishes 
with capers and anchovies 


SERVES 4 

12 ounces radishes (about 12), halved if large 

2 teaspoons capers, rinsed and chopped 

6 anchovy fillets, finely chopped 

1 garlic clove, minced 

2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1/2 lemon, for serving 

Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F, with a rack in the upper 
third. In a small roasting pan, toss together the 
radishes, capers, anchovies, garlic, and oil; season 
with salt and pepper. Spread out the mixture 
evenly. Roast, stirring once, until the radishes are 
shriveled and fragrant, 30 to 35 minutes. Serve 
warm with lemon. 

SIDE DISHES 353 








roasted root vegetables 
with sage and garlic 

SERVES 4 TO 6 

8 ounces rutabagas, peeled and 
cut into   cubes or half-moons 


8 ounces turnips, peeled and 
cut into   cubes or half-moons 


8 ounces carrots, peeled and 
cut into   cubes or rounds 


8 ounces parsnips, peeled and 
cut into   cubes or rounds 


8 fresh sage leaves 
4 garlic cloves (do not peel) 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
41/2 teaspoons olive oil 

Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Toss together all the ingredients; 
spread out in a roasting pan. Roast, stirring 
occasionally, until golden brown and tender, 
50 to 60 minutes. 







haricots verts 
with pecans and lemon 


SERVES 4 

Coarse salt 

1 pound haricots verts or thin green beans, 
trimmed 

1/2 cup pecans 
3 tablespoons sherry vinegar 


1 teaspoon sugar 
Freshly ground pepper 


1/4 cup olive oil 
1 teaspoon freshly grated lemon zest 


1. Preheat the oven to 425 degrees F. Bring a large pot of 
water to a boil; add salt and the haricots verts. Cook 
the beans until bright green and crisp-tender, 3 to 
4 minutes; drain. Transfer to a serving dish. 
2. Meanwhile, spread the pecans in a single layer 
on a rimmed baking sheet; toast in the oven until 
fragrant, about 5 minutes. Coarsely chop the nuts 
when they are cool enough to handle. 
3. Whisk the vinegar, sugar, and 1/4 teaspoon salt 
in a small bowl; season with pepper. Whisking constantly, 
pour in the oil in a slow, steady stream; 
whisk until emulsified. Just before serving, gently 
toss the beans with the vinaigrette and chopped 
nuts; sprinkle with the zest. Serve warm. 






cauliflower, prosciutto, 
and goat cheese gratin 

SERVES 6 TO 8 

Unsalted butter, for the baking dish 

2 small heads cauliflower (about 3 pounds 
total), cut into   florets 


12 ounces soft goat cheese, crumbled 

1/4 cup fresh orange juice (1 orange) 
1/4 cup homemade or low-sodium 
store-bought chicken stock, or water 
2 teaspoons chopped fresh thyme 


2 tablespoons all-purpose flour 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


3 ounces thinly sliced prosciutto 
(about 5 slices), coarsely chopped 


1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Butter a 2-quart casserole 
or an 8-inch-square baking dish; set aside. Bring 
a large pot of water to a boil. Add the cauliflower; 
cook until just tender, 4 to 5 minutes. Drain. 
2. Whisk together 8 ounces goat cheese and the orange 
juice, stock, thyme, flour, 11/2 teaspoons salt, 
and 1/2 teaspoon pepper until smooth. Toss in the 
cauliflower and prosciutto. Spoon into the buttered 
dish. Top with the remaining 4 ounces goat cheese. 
3. Cover with foil; bake 30 minutes. Remove the foil; 
bake until bubbling and just golden, about 30 minutes 
more. Let cool slightly before serving. 
354 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 








individual portobello 
mushroom gratins 

MAKES 6 

2 tablespoons olive oil, plus more for 
the baking sheet 


6 portobello mushrooms, stems removed 
and reserved 


1/4 cup finely grated Parmesan cheese 
(1 ounce) 


1/4 cup plain dry bread crumbs 

3 tablespoons finely chopped fresh flat- 
leaf parsley 


3 tablespoons chopped fresh chives 

2 shallots, thinly sliced 
1 pound white or cremini mushrooms, sliced 

1/2 cup dry white wine 
1/2 cup heavy cream 


1 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Lightly oil a rimmed 
baking sheet. Arrange the portobello caps, gill sides 
down, on the sheet. Bake until tender, 20 to 25 minutes. 
Transfer to a plate to cool. Preheat the broiler. 
2. Stir together the cheese, bread crumbs, 1 tablespoon 
parsley, 1 tablespoon chives, and 1 tablespoon 
oil; set aside. 
3. Chop the portobello stems into   pieces. 
Heat the remaining tablespoon oil in a large skillet 
over medium heat until hot but not smoking. 
Add the shallots; cook, stirring, until softened, about 
2 minutes. Add the sliced mushrooms and chopped 
stems; cook, stirring occasionally, until tender, 6 to 
7 minutes. Add the wine; cook until most of the liquid 
has evaporated, about 2 minutes. Stir in the 
cream, remaining 2 tablespoons each parsley and 
chives, and the salt and pepper. Remove from heat. 
4. Arrange the portobello caps, gill sides up, on a 
clean baking sheet. Divide the mushroom mixture 
and then the crumb mixture among the caps. Broil 
until bubbling and golden brown, about 2 minutes. 






beet and cucumber relish 
with grilled asparagus 

SERVES 4 

If you use beets of different sizes, keep in mind 
that their cooking times may vary. Take each out 
of the oven as it's ready (knife-tender). 

2 medium red beets (about 1/2 pound 
without greens), tails and about 1 inch 
of stems left intact 


1 cup diced (  pieces) peeled 
English cucumber 


1 teaspoon finely chopped shallot 

2 teaspoons balsamic vinegar 
2 teaspoons extra-virgin olive oil 


Coarse salt 
1 bunch asparagus, trimmed and peeled 


1/2 cup loosely packed fresh basil leaves 

1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Wrap each beet in foil. 
Roast until tender when pierced with the tip of a 
knife, 45 minutes to 1 hour. When cool enough to 
handle, trim the beets and rub off the skins with 
paper towels, or peel with a paring knife. 
2. Cut the beets into   dice, and transfer to a 
medium bowl. Stir in the cucumber, shallot, vinegar, 
1 teaspoon oil, and 1/4 teaspoon salt. Refrigerate 
until ready to use, up to 2 hours. 
3. Preheat a grill or grill pan until hot. Toss the asparagus 
with the remaining teaspoon oil and 1/2 teaspoon 
salt in a large bowl. Grill the asparagus, 
turning once, until tender, 4 to 8 minutes (depending 
on the thickness of the spears). 
4. Arrange the asparagus on a platter, and let cool 
completely. Finely chop the basil, and stir into the 
beet relish. Using a slotted spoon, spoon the beet 
relish over the asparagus. 
SIDE DISHES 355 








wilted baby spinach with 
crispy shallots 

SERVES 6 

Baby spinach is easy to find-either loose at 
farmers' markets or prewashed and bagged at 
supermarkets. If possible, get the curly-leaf (crinkled) 
type, as it doesn't shrink as much during 
cooking as the flat-leaf variety does. 

Vegetable or light olive oil, for frying 

All-purpose flour, for dredging 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1 large shallot, cut crosswise into rings and 
separated (about 1/3 cup) 

2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
1 pound baby spinach 


1. Heat 1/2 inch vegetable oil in a small skillet over 
medium heat. Meanwhile, put the flour in a bowl, 
and season with salt and pepper. Dredge the shallot 
rings in the flour all at once. When the oil is hot 
(a shallot ring will sizzle on contact), fry the rings 
in batches, shaking off excess flour before transferring 
them to the skillet. Fry until golden brown 
and crisp, 1 to 3 minutes. Transfer the shallot rings 
with tongs or a slotted spoon to paper towels to drain. 
2. Heat the extra-virgin olive oil in a Dutch oven or 
shallow stockpot over medium heat until hot but 
not smoking. Add the spinach (if it doesn't fit all 
at once, wait to add more until some of it cooks 
down, or cook in two batches). Season with salt and 
pepper. Cover; cook, uncovering occasionally to 
toss, until the spinach is wilted, 2 to 3 minutes. 
3. Transfer the spinach to a serving bowl with tongs 
or a slotted spoon, leaving any excess liquid in pot. 
Sprinkle with the shallot rings; serve immediately. 






tomatoes with oregano and lime 

SERVES 4 

This recipe calls for lime juice-rather than 
lemon juice or vinegar-to brighten the sweet flavor 
of summer tomatoes. We used heirloom varieties 
for their exceptional taste and vivid colors, 
but you can use any kind or size-from the farmers' 
market or your own backyard-as long as 
they are ripe. 

11/4 pounds assorted ripe tomatoes 
in all sizes, cut into wedges if large 
or halved if small 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
Juice of 1 lime (about 2 tablespoons) 


2 tablespoons coarsely chopped 
fresh oregano 


Arrange the tomatoes on a serving platter; season 
with salt and pepper. Drizzle with the oil and lime 
juice; sprinkle with the oregano. 







ratatouille 

SERVES 6 

Ratatouille is very versatile. It works equally well 
as a main course or side dish, and can be served 
hot, cold, or at room temperature. You can refrigerate 
it, covered, up to 3 days. 

1 large eggplant (about 11/2 pounds), 
cut into   cubes 


4 medium zucchini, cut into   cubes 

1/2 cup plus 2 tablespoons extra-virgin 
olive oil 


2 tablespoons coarsely chopped 
fresh thyme 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

6 pounds vine-ripened tomatoes (about 10) 
2 bell peppers, 1 red and 1 yellow 


4 garlic cloves, finely chopped 
2 medium onions, halved and cut into 
half-moons 
1/2 cup coarsely chopped fresh basil 


1/2 cup coarsely chopped fresh flat-leaf 
parsley 


356 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Toss together the eggplant, 
zucchini, 1/2 cup oil, 1 tablespoon thyme, 1 teaspoon 
salt, and 1/2 teaspoon pepper on a large 
rimmed baking sheet. Roast, tossing occasionally, 
until the vegetables are golden, about 1 hour. 
2. Meanwhile, bring a large pot of water to a boil. 
Prepare an ice-water bath, and set aside. Cut a small, 
shallow X in the stem end of each tomato; blanch 
the tomatoes until the skins begin to loosen, about 
30 seconds. Immediately transfer with a slotted 
spoon to the ice-water bath. 
3. Drain the tomatoes. Remove the skins; cut the 
tomatoes into quarters, discarding the seeds. 
4. Place one bell pepper at a time on the trivet of a 
gas stove burner on high heat; roast, turning occasionally 
with tongs, until black all over. (Or, broil 
the peppers in a baking pan, turning them occasionally.) 
Transfer to a large bowl, and cover with 
plastic wrap. Let them steam in the bowl until cool 
enough to handle, about 10 minutes. 
5. Remove the skins from the peppers. Discard the 
tops and seeds. Cut the peppers lengthwise into 
 -thick strips. 
6. When the eggplant and zucchini are done roasting, 
heat the remaining 2 tablespoons oil in a large, 
deep skillet over medium-high heat until hot but 
not smoking. Add the garlic and onions; cook until 
soft, about 4 minutes. Add the tomatoes and peppers; 
cook until the tomatoes are soft, about 7 minutes. 
Add the eggplant and zucchini, 1/4 cup basil, 
and the remaining tablespoon thyme. Season with 
salt and pepper. 
7. Reduce heat to medium-low; simmer, stirring 
occasionally, until the vegetables are very soft, 
about 30 minutes. Stir in the parsley and remaining 
1/4 cup basil. Cook until heated through, about 
1 minute more. 







haricots verts 
with mustard vinaigrette 


SERVES 2 

I like to serve these chilled haricots verts with 
lamb-their crunch and acidity cut the richness 
of the meat. Blanched haricots verts can be refrigerated, 
in a resealable plastic bag, up to 1 day. Refrigerate 
the vinaigrette separately, up to 1 day; 
bring to room temperature before serving. 

Coarse salt 

1/2 pound haricots verts or other thin green 
beans, trimmed 


1/2 teaspoon finely chopped shallot 
11/2 teaspoons red-wine vinegar 

Freshly ground pepper 

1/2 teaspoon grainy or smooth Dijon mustard 
11/2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

SIDE DISHES 357 


1. Bring a large saucepan of water to a boil. Prepare 
an ice-water bath. Add salt to the boiling water, then 
add the haricots verts; cook just until the beans are 
bright green all over, 1 to 2 minutes. 
2. Drain the beans; rinse immediately with cold 
water. Transfer to the ice-water bath. When chilled 
completely, drain; pat dry. 
3. Put the shallot and vinegar in a small bowl; season 
with salt and pepper. Let stand 15 minutes. 
Whisk in the mustard. Whisking constantly, pour 
in the oil in a slow, steady stream until emulsified. 
Set aside until ready to dress the beans; whisk before 
using. 
baby bok choy 
with ginger and garlic 


SERVES 4 TO 6 

2 pounds baby bok choy (8 to 10), halved 
lengthwise and soaked in cold water to 
remove any dirt 


2 teaspoons minced peeled fresh ginger 
2 garlic cloves, thinly sliced 


1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon toasted 
sesame oil 


1/4 cup tamari soy sauce 

2 tablespoons oyster sauce 

1. Bring a large pot of water to a boil. Add the bok 
choy (in two batches, if necessary), and cook until 
tender, 5 to 7 minutes. Drain in a colander; let stand 
at least 5 minutes. Transfer to a serving dish. 
2. Meanwhile, cook the ginger and garlic in oil in 
a small saucepan over medium-low heat, stirring, 
until soft, about 8 minutes. Add the tamari and oyster 
sauce; cook, stirring, until heated through, about 
30 seconds more. Pour the sauce over the bok choy; 
toss to coat. 
braised endive 
in mustard vinaigrette 


SERVES 4 

1 tablespoon unsalted butter 

11/2 pounds Belgian endive (about 6 heads) 

3 cups homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock 


11/2 tablespoons grainy mustard 
2 tablespoons red-wine vinegar 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil 


1 tablespoon finely chopped fresh flat-leaf 
parsley, for garnish 


1. In a large skillet, melt the butter over medium 
heat. Add the endive, and cook, turning occasionally, 
until browned on all sides, about 5 minutes. 
Pour the stock into the skillet; bring to a boil, and 
cover. Reduce heat to medium-low, and simmer, 
turning the endive occasionally, until just tender, 
about 20 minutes. 
2. Using a slotted spoon, transfer the endive to a 
paper-towel-lined plate; discard the stock. Pat the 
endive dry, and set aside. 
3. Make the dressing: In a small bowl, whisk together 
the mustard and vinegar. Season with salt 
and pepper. Whisking constantly, pour in the oil in 
a slow, steady stream; whisk until emulsified. Gently 
toss each endive in the dressing, coating well. 
Garnish with the parsley, and serve at room temperature; 
set any extra dressing on the side. 
jerusalem artichoke 
and chestnut gratin 

SERVES 6 TO 8 

1 pound Jerusalem artichokes (about 10 
small), peeled, sliced 1/4 inch thick, and 
reserved in cold water (drain and pat dry 
before using) 

3 cups milk 
8 ounces creme fraiche 


2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 
1 cup grated Gruyere cheese (4 ounces) 


358 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


1 tablespoon minced fresh thyme 

11/2 teaspoons coarse salt 
1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 
1/2 pound Yukon Gold potatoes, peeled and 
sliced 1/4 inch thick 
5 ounces shallots (about 4), thinly sliced 

5 ounces jarred chestnuts


4 slices white bread, trimmed of crusts, 
lightly toasted and torn into small pieces 


1. Preheat the oven to 450 degrees F. In a large saucepan, 
bring the artichokes and milk just to a boil. Reduce 
heat; simmer until artichokes are crisp-tender, 
about 10 minutes. Drain in a colander set over a 
bowl; reserve 3/4 cup milk. 
2. In a large bowl, whisk the reserved milk with the 
creme fraiche, lemon juice, 1/4 cup cheese, thyme, 
salt, and pepper. Add the artichokes, potatoes, shallots, 
and chestnuts; stir to combine. 
3. Pour the mixture into a 11/2-quart gratin dish; 
cover tightly with foil. Bake on a baking sheet until 
the artichokes are tender when pierced, about 1 
hour. Remove the foil; sprinkle the top of the gratin 
with the bread pieces and remaining 3/4 cup cheese. 
Continue baking, uncovered, until golden brown, 8 
to 10 minutes more. Serve warm. 
roasted brussels sprouts 
with almonds and honey 

SERVES 8 TO 10 

3 pounds Brussels sprouts, trimmed and 
halved 


1/2 cup (1 stick) unsalted butter, melted 

1 cup slivered almonds (4 ounces) 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


3 tablespoons honey 

3 tablespoons fresh lemon juice (about 
1 lemon) 


1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Place the sprouts, butter, 
and almonds on a rimmed baking sheet. Season 
with salt and pepper; toss to combine. Roast, 
stirring, until sprouts are golden brown and tender, 
35 to 40 minutes. 
2. Transfer to a serving bowl; immediately dress 
with the honey and lemon juice, and season with 
salt and pepper. Serve warm or at room temperature. 
roasted curried cauliflower 

SERVES 4 

An Indian-inspired spice blend adds a warm hue 
and gives this vegetable dish an exotic taste. 

11/2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
1 teaspoon mustard seeds 

1 teaspoon cumin seeds 

3/4 teaspoon curry powder 
3/4 teaspoon coarse salt 
1 large head cauliflower (about 2 pounds), 
cut into large florets 


Nonstick olive oil cooking spray 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Coat a rimmed baking 
sheet with cooking spray. In a large bowl, stir 
together the oil, mustard seeds, cumin seeds, curry 
powder, and salt. Add the cauliflower, tossing to 
coat thoroughly with the spice mixture. 
2. Arrange the cauliflower in a single layer on the 
prepared sheet. Roast until the florets are browned 
on bottom and tender when pierced with the tip of 
a paring knife, about 35 minutes. Serve hot. 
turnip hash with broccoli rabe 

SERVES 4 

1/2 pound plum tomatoes 

1/2 pound medium turnips, peeled 
and cut into   dice 


1/2 pound parsnips, peeled and cut 
into   dice 


1/2 pound Yukon Gold potatoes, peeled and 
cut into   dice 


1 bunch broccoli rabe, cut into   
pieces (about 61/2 cups) 


11/2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
1 medium onion, coarsely chopped 

4 garlic cloves, smashed 

3/4 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/4 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes 
1 teaspoon coarsely chopped fresh thyme 


SIDE DISHES 359 


1. Bring a large pot of water to a boil. Prepare an 
ice-water bath; set aside. Score an X on the bottom 
of each tomato with a paring knife. Add the tomatoes 
to the pot. Boil until the skins are loosened, 
about 30 seconds; remove the tomatoes with a slotted 
spoon (keeping the water at a boil), and immediately 
plunge them into the ice bath. Drain, peel, 
and seed the tomatoes, then coarsely chop the flesh. 
2. Add the turnips to the pot; boil until just tender 
when pierced with a fork, 3 to 5 minutes. Using a 
slotted spoon, transfer the turnips to a colander to 
drain. Repeat the process with the parsnips and 
then the potatoes. Add the broccoli rabe to the pot, 
and boil until bright green and crisp-tender, about 
1 minute. Drain in a colander; set aside. 
3. Heat the oil in a large, heavy skillet over medium 
heat until hot but not smoking. Add the onion, garlic, 
salt, red pepper flakes, thyme, and reserved 
turnips, parsnips, and potatoes; spread evenly to 
cover bottom of skillet. Cook, without stirring, until 
the vegetables begin to brown, about 15 minutes. 
4. Add the reserved tomatoes and broccoli rabe. Stir 
once; cook until the vegetables are very tender and 
browned, about 25 minutes. Serve hot. 
tuscan kale with caramelized 
onions and red-wine vinegar 

SERVES 4 

Tuscan kale, also known as cavolo nero, dinosaur 
kale, and lacinato kale, is sweeter and more tender 
than regular kale, which can be used instead 
but may require more cooking time. 

1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil 

1 large red onion, halved and thinly sliced 
into half-moons 


1 large garlic clove, thinly sliced 

3/4 teaspoon coarse salt 
2 tablespoons red-wine vinegar 

1 pound Tuscan kale, middle stems 
removed, leaves cut into 1  pieces 


1. Combine the oil, onion, garlic, and 1/4 teaspoon 
salt in a large saute pan; cook over medium heat, 
stirring occasionally, until the onion is lightly 
browned, about 5 minutes. Reduce heat to medium-
low; cook until the onion is soft, about 10 minutes. 
2. Add the vinegar to the pan, and raise heat to 
medium-high. Add the kale, 1/4 cup water, and remaining 
1/2 teaspoon salt; cook, stirring, until the 
kale begins to soften, about 3 minutes. As the pan 
becomes dry, add another 1/4 cup water, and cook 
until the kale is tender, about 3 minutes more. Serve 
immediately. 
leeks with mustard vinaigrette 

SERVES 4 

6 leeks (about 21/2 pounds), roots and all 
but 1 inch of green tops trimmed, halved 
lengthwise and washed well 


2 tablespoons Dijon mustard 

2 tablespoons red-wine vinegar 

2 garlic cloves, minced 

1 tablespoon minced fresh basil 
1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil 


1/4 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/8 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 


1. Bring a large pot of water to a boil. With kitchen 
twine, tie the leeks into 2 bundles, with the green 
tops at the same ends. Add the bundles to the boiling 
water. Reduce heat, and simmer until the leeks 
are tender, about 15 minutes. Remove the leeks; 
rinse under cold water. Drain well, and gently pat 
dry with paper towels. Set aside. 
2. Make the vinaigrette: In a large bowl, whisk together 
the mustard, vinegar, garlic, and basil. Slowly 
whisk in the oil in a fine stream. Whisk in the salt 
and pepper. 
3. Gently toss the leeks in the bowl with the 
vinaigrette, coating well. Serve chilled or at room 
temperature. 
360 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


roasted acorn squash 
with pomegranate glaze 

SERVES 6 

Use a citrus reamer, juicer, or press to extract the 
pomegranate juice. 

2 cups fresh pomegranate juice 
(about 7 pomegranates), plus seeds 
from 1/2 pomegranate for garnish 


1/4 cup sugar 

5 whole allspice 
5 whole black peppercorns 


1 dried bay leaf 
1 whole cinnamon stick 


Unsalted butter, melted, for brushing, plus 
more at room temperature for the pan 

3 acorn squash, sliced into  -thick 
rings, seeds removed 


Coarse salt 

1. Preheat the oven to 450 degrees F. In a small saucepan, 
combine the juice, sugar, allspice, peppercorns, bay 
leaf, and cinnamon. Simmer until reduced to a 
syrup. Drain through a fine sieve into a small bowl, 
and discard the spices. 
2. Line a baking sheet with parchment paper. Butter 
the parchment. Lay the squash rings on top of 
the parchment; brush the tops with melted butter, 
and season with salt. 
3. Roast the squash until tender when pierced with 
a paring knife and the undersides are well browned, 
about 30 minutes. Turn the squash over, and brush 
the tops with pomegranate glaze. Continue cooking 
5 minutes more. Remove from the oven; brush 
the squash again with glaze. Transfer to a serving 
platter; serve immediately, garnished with pomegranate 
seeds. 
cauliflower puree 

SERVES 4 

For a garnish, saute a few sliced cauliflower florets 
in a bit of butter until tender and lightly golden. 

1 head (13/4 pounds) cauliflower, stem 
and tough stalks trimmed, florets 
roughly chopped 


1 cup water or chicken stock, preferably 
homemade 


2 to 3 tablespoons sour cream 

1 tablespoon unsalted butter, softened 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


1. Combine the cauliflower and water or stock in a 
medium saucepan, and bring to a boil over high 
heat. Reduce heat to a simmer, and cook until the 
cauliflower is very tender, about 10 minutes. 
2. Using a slotted spoon, transfer the cauliflower to 
the bowl of a food processor. Process until smooth, 
adding 1 to 2 tablespoons cooking liquid, 15 to 20 
seconds. Add the sour cream and butter, and 
process 5 to 10 seconds more. Season with salt and 
pepper. Serve hot. 
mexican-style corn 

SERVES 8 

Set out the sour cream, cheese, and corn, and let 
each person fix his own. 

1 cup sour cream or creme fraiche 

1/8 teaspoon paprika 

2 cups grated dry, aged cheese, such 
as Jack or Asiago 


8 ears corn on the cob 

1. Heat a grill to medium-high. Place sour cream in 
a small bowl and sprinkle with paprika; set aside. 
Place cheese in a small bowl; set aside. Grill corn 
until tender, about 15 minutes, turning frequently. 
2. Remove from the grill; when cool enough to handle, 
pull back the husks and remove the silk. Brush 
the corn with sour cream, and roll in cheese. 
SIDE DISHES 361 


asparagus and shiitake stir-fry 

SERVES 4 

To clean the mushrooms, simply wipe the caps 
with a damp paper towel; do not rinse, as they 
will become soggy. Toast the sesame seeds in a 
dry skillet over medium heat until golden. 

1 tablespoon dark sesame oil 

1 bunch medium or thick asparagus, 
tough ends trimmed, stalks sliced into 
1  lengths 


8 ounces fresh shiitake mushrooms, 
trimmed and sliced into  -thick 
pieces 


1 tablespoon sesame seeds, toasted 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


Heat the oil in a large skillet or wok over medium-
high heat. Add the asparagus and mushrooms, and 
saute just until tender, about 5 minutes. Remove 
from heat. Sprinkle with the toasted sesame seeds, 
and season with salt and pepper. Serve hot. 

fried green tomato wedges 

SERVES 4 TO 6 AS AN APPETIZER 

2 cups yellow cornmeal 

4 teaspoons coarse salt, plus more 
for seasoning 


1 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper 
1/2 teaspoon cayenne pepper 


2 cups buttermilk 
2 large eggs 


2 tablespoons fresh lime juice (about 
2 limes) 


Canola oil, for frying 

3 large green tomatoes, cut into  thick 
wedges 


Basil-Lime Mayonnaise (recipe follows) 

1. In a medium shallow bowl, combine the cornmeal, 
salt, black pepper, and cayenne pepper; set 
aside. In another shallow bowl, whisk together the 
buttermilk, eggs, and lime juice (the mixture may 
appear curdled); set aside. 
2. In a large cast-iron or heavy skillet, pour oil to a 
depth of 1/2 inch; heat until a deep-fry thermometer 
measures 375 degrees F. Meanwhile, working in batches, 
dip the tomatoes in the buttermilk mixture, then in 
the cornmeal mixture. Set aside on a large plate; repeat 
with the remaining tomatoes. 
3. Fry the tomatoes, working in batches, until 
golden brown, about 1 minute on each side. Drain 
on a paper-towel-lined plate. Season with salt while 
hot. Serve warm with basil-lime mayonnaise. 






basil-lime mayonnaise 

MAKES 11/4 CUPS 

1 large egg 
1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 


1 cup canola oil 
2 teaspoons fresh lime juice 
1/4 cup finely sliced fresh basil leaves 


1. In a food processor, pulse the egg with the salt 
and pepper until foamy and pale, about 11/2 minutes. 
With the machine running, add the oil through the 
feed tube, 1 drop at a time, until the mixture starts 
to thicken (do not stop the machine at this point, 
or the mayonnaise may not come together). Add 
the remaining oil in a slow, steady stream. 
2. When all the oil has been incorporated, slowly 
add the lime juice, mixing until combined. Add the 
basil; pulse until combined. Let chill before serving. 
Fresh mayonnaise can be refrigerated in an airtight 
container up to 5 days. 
NOTE Raw eggs should not be used in food prepared 
for pregnant women, babies, young children, the elderly, 
or anyone whose health is compromised. 

362 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 








sauteed okra and tomatoes 

SERVES 4 

The secret to cooking okra to a crisp-tender texture 
is a very hot skillet. 

1 tablespoon whole mustard seeds 

1/2 teaspoon whole cumin seeds 
1/2 teaspoon ground coriander 


2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

1 small red onion, cut into  thick 
wedges 


1 pound fresh okra, stems and 
ends trimmed 


3 medium tomatoes, seeded and cut into 
 -thick wedges 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1. In a small bowl, combine the mustard seeds, 
cumin seeds, and coriander; set aside. Heat the oil 
in a large skillet set over medium heat. Add the 
onion, and cook, stirring, until soft, about 3 minutes. 
2. Raise heat to medium-high; add the spice mixture, 
okra, and 1/2 cup water. Cook, stirring, until the 
okra is bright green and just tender, about 6 minutes, 
adding more water if the skillet becomes too dry. 
3. Add the tomato wedges, and cook until just 
heated through, about 1 minute. Season with salt 
and pepper. Serve immediately. 






fried yuca with lemon 

SERVES 8 

Yuca is a starchy root with tough, brown skin, 
crisp, white flesh, and a mild flavor. It is also 
known as cassava. 

5 pounds yuca (about 6 yuca), peeled 
Peanut or canola oil, for frying 


4 garlic cloves 
Coarse salt 


Lemon wedges, for serving 

1. Cut the yuca crosswise into   pieces. Cut 
each piece into 1/4- to  -thick strips. Cut out 
the tough core from the inner edge of each piece; 
discard the core. Transfer the yuca to a large 
saucepan. Cover with water by 2 inches. Bring to a 
boil. Cook until just soft and translucent, about 5 
minutes. Drain, and pat dry. 
2. Heat 5 inches oil in a 4-quart heavy-bottomed 
saucepan over medium-high heat until it registers 
360 degrees  F on a deep-fry thermometer. Fry the garlic 
until golden, about 1 minute. Discard the garlic. 
Working in batches of several strips, fry the yuca, 
turning once, until golden brown, about 4 minutes. 
Transfer to paper towels using a slotted spoon; let 
drain. Sprinkle with salt. Serve with lemon wedges. 






aunt sara's cheese grits 

SERVES 8 TO 10 

3/4 cup (11/2 sticks) unsalted butter, plus more 
for the baking dish 
3 cups water 

11/2 cups quick-cooking grits 
1 pound sharp Cheddar cheese, grated 

1 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/2 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 


1/2 teaspoon garlic powder 

1/2 teaspoon hot pepper sauce, such as 
Tabasco (optional) 


3 large eggs, lightly beaten 

1. Preheat the oven to 325 degrees  F. Butter an 8-inchsquare 
baking dish. Bring the water to a boil in a 
medium saucepan, and stir in the grits. Reduce heat. 
Cover; simmer 2 minutes, stirring occasionally. 
2. Add the cheese, butter, salt, pepper, garlic powder, 
and hot pepper sauce, if using. Stir until the 
cheese has completely melted, and stir in the eggs 
until well combined. 
3. Pour mixture into the prepared pan. Bake until 
creamy inside and golden on the top, about 1 hour. 
Let cool slightly on a wire rack before serving. 
SIDE DISHES 363 








smoky pinto beans 

SERVES 6 TO 8 

1 pound dried pinto beans, picked over 

1/2 white onion, plus more, finely chopped, for 
garnish 


2 garlic cloves, crushed 

2 dried avocado leaves 

1 teaspoon dried epazote 

3 fresh cilantro sprigs 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
2 plum tomatoes, seeded and chopped 


2 ounces cotija cheese, crumbled 
Lime wedges, for serving 


1. Cover the beans with cold water by 2 inches in a 
bowl; refrigerate 8 hours. 
2. Drain the beans; transfer to a small stockpot. Add 
the onion, garlic, avocado leaves, epazote, and 
cilantro; cover with cold water by 2 inches. Bring 
to a boil; add 1 tablespoon salt. Reduce heat to 
medium-low; simmer, adding water as needed to 
cover the beans, until the beans are tender and the 
liquid is soupy, 2 to 21/2 hours. Discard the avocado 
leaves. Season with salt and pepper. Garnish with 
onion, tomatoes, and cheese. Serve with lime wedges. 
creamy polenta 
with bacon and sage 

SERVES 4 

Water or stock can be substituted for any or all of 
the milk, but milk makes a creamier polenta. 

2 ounces thickly sliced bacon, cut 
into   pieces 


1 teaspoon chopped fresh sage leaves, 
plus more whole leaves for garnish 


4 cups milk 

3/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons quick-cooking 
polenta 
3 tablespoons unsalted butter 

1/2 teaspoon coarse salt, or more to taste 

1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper, or 
more to taste 


2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
(optional) 


1. Place a medium saucepan over low heat. Add the 
bacon, and cook until crisp and golden, about 8 
minutes. Remove the bacon from the saucepan; 
transfer to a paper-towel-lined plate. Set aside. 
2. Add the chopped sage to the saucepan, and cook 
in the bacon fat until fragrant, about 30 seconds. 
Add the milk, and bring to a boil. 
3. Add the polenta in a steady stream, whisking constantly 
until it is smooth and creamy, about 6 minutes. 
Whisk in the butter, and season with the salt 
and pepper. Transfer to a serving bowl, and crumble 
the reserved bacon on top. Heat the olive oil in 
a small saute pan over medium heat. Add the whole 
sage leaves, and fry until crisp, about 30 seconds. 
Remove from the skillet; scatter over the polenta. 
Serve immediately. 
the best onion rings 

SERVES 4 TO 6 

After cooking the onion rings, keep them warm 
in a 200 degrees F oven while you finish the remaining 
batches. 

1 cup plus 2 tablespoons all-purpose flour 

1 teaspoon ground cumin 
Pinch of cayenne pepper 


1 teaspoon coarse salt, plus more for 
seasoning 


3/4 cup buttermilk 
3/4 cup beer 
1 large egg 
4 cups peanut oil 

2 large white onions (about 2 pounds), 
sliced crosswise 1/2 inch thick and 
separated into rings 


1. Combine the flour, cumin, cayenne, and 1 teaspoon 
salt in a medium bowl. Slowly whisk in the 
buttermilk, beer, and egg until smooth. Let the batter 
stand 15 minutes. 
2. In a large saucepan, heat the oil over medium-
high heat until a deep-fry thermometer registers 
375 degrees F. Working in batches, dip the onion slices in 
the batter, turning to coat. Gently drop the slices 
into the hot oil. Cook, turning the rings once, until 
364 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


golden brown, about 2 minutes. (Adjust heat between 
batches as necessary to keep oil at a steady 
temperature.) 

3. Use a slotted spoon to transfer the rings to a 
paper-towel-lined baking sheet to drain. Season 
immediately with salt. 
black beans with poblano 

SERVES 4 

2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

2 shallots, thinly sliced 

1 poblano chile, seeded and chopped 

2 cans (15 ounces each) black beans, rinsed 
and drained 

2 tablespoons fresh lime juice 

1/2 teaspoon ground cumin 

Pinch of cayenne pepper 

Coarse salt and freshly ground black 

pepper 

Lime wedges, for serving 

Heat the oil in a medium skillet over medium heat. 
Add the shallots and the chile; cook, stirring frequently, 
until tender, about 5 minutes. Transfer to 
a large bowl; add the beans, lime juice, cumin, and 
cayenne pepper. Toss well to combine. Season with 
salt and black pepper. Serve warm or at room temperature, 
with lime wedges on the side. 

roasted squash wedges 

SERVES 4 

We used acorn squash for this recipe, but other 
types, such as butternut or pumpkin, work as well. 

2 acorn squash 

2 tablespoons butter, melted 

2 tablespoons honey 

1 teaspoon ground cinnamon 

Pinch of ground nutmeg 

1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 

1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 

1. Heat the oven to 400 degrees F. Cut the squash in half 
through the stem end, and remove the seeds. Cut 
each half into 3 wedges, 11/2 to 2 inches thick. Place 
the wedges in a large roasting pan. 
2. Toss with the butter, honey, cinnamon, nutmeg, 
salt, and pepper. Roast the squash, tossing occasionally, 
until tender and golden brown, 35 to 45 
minutes. 
three-variety squash tian 

SERVES 6 

For the best flavor, use freshly made bread 
crumbs for this dish because they have a much 
fluffier texture. Place as many slices of white 
bread as will comfortably fit in the bowl of your 
food processor, and pulse the bread until crumbly. 
Any leftover bread crumbs can be placed in a 
resealable plastic bag and frozen for future use. 

11/4 pounds assorted squash, such as 
Costata Romanesco, patty pan, yellow, 
green, and black, sliced 1/8 inch thick 

2 medium ripe tomatoes (1 pound), 
sliced 1/8 inch thick 


3 tablespoons olive oil 

5 tablespoons homemade or low-sodium 
store-bought chicken stock 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

2 tablespoons fresh thyme leaves, 
plus sprigs for garnish 


1 cup fresh bread crumbs 
2 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted 


1. Heat the oven to 350 degrees F. In a 10-inch round gratin 
dish, arrange the squash slices and tomatoes in an 
overlapping pattern to fill the dish. Brush the vegetables 
with olive oil; drizzle the remaining oil on 
top. Drizzle the chicken stock on top. Sprinkle with 
salt and pepper and 1 tablespoon thyme leaves. 
2. In a medium bowl, combine the bread crumbs, 
butter, and remaining thyme, and season with salt 
and pepper. Arrange the bread-crumb mixture on 
top of the vegetables. 
3. Bake until the vegetables are tender and the bread 
crumbs are golden, about 50 minutes. Remove from 
the oven. Serve garnished with thyme sprigs. 
SIDE DISHES 365 


steamed artichokes with grainy 
mustard and bacon dressing 

SERVES 4 

The grainy mustard and bacon dressing is best 
when made and served immediately. The artichokes, 
however, can be prepared in advance. 

4 large artichokes 

Juice of 4 lemons 
1 teaspoon coarse salt, plus more 
for seasoning 
1 teaspoon whole black peppercorns 


1 large sprig fresh thyme 
2 garlic cloves 


2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil, plus 
more for the cooking liquid 


6 strips thick bacon, cut into   pieces 

2 shallots, finely chopped 
2 carrots, finely diced 


1 stalk celery, finely diced 

21/2 tablespoons grainy mustard, plus 
more to taste 
Freshly ground black pepper 

1. Fill a bowl with ice and water; set aside. Trim the 
artichokes; snap off the tough outer leaves. Cut in 
half, and cut off the top quarter of each artichoke. 
Snip the remaining leaf tips with scissors. Trim the 
bottom of the stem; using a vegetable peeler, peel 
off the tough outer skin. Spread the leaves to gain 
easier access to the choke; scoop out the choke with 
a melon baller. Squeeze some lemon juice onto the 
heart; squeeze more lemon juice into the ice bath; 
add lemon halves and artichokes while preparing 
the rest. 
2. Fill a saucepan large enough to accommodate all 
the artichokes with 2 inches of water. Add salt, peppercorns, 
thyme, garlic, and 2 tablespoons olive oil; 
bring to a simmer. Add the artichokes, stem end up; 
cover the saucepan. Steam until tender, about 25 
minutes. The leaves should pull off easily; the heart 
should feel tender when pierced. Drain well. Cool 
to room temperature. 
3. Meanwhile, cook the bacon in a large saute pan 
over medium-low heat until brown and crisp, and 
the fat is rendered. Using a slotted spoon, remove 
the bacon from the saute pan, and set aside. 
4. Depending on the amount of bacon fat in the 
saute pan, add enough olive oil to make a total of 
1/3 cup fat and oil. Add the shallots, carrots, and celery, 
and cook until the vegetables are soft and fragrant, 
about 4 minutes. Stir in the grainy mustard, 
and season with salt and pepper. Return the bacon 
to the saute pan. Arrange the artichokes on a serving 
platter. Spoon the hot mixture into the cavity 
of each artichoke. 
miso-glazed eggplant 

SERVES 6 

The eggplant can also be served as an hors 
d'oeuvre, cut into bite-size pieces. 

5 tablespoons white miso 
3 tablespoons sake 


2 tablespoons sugar 
2 tablespoons peanut or grapeseed oil 


6 Japanese eggplants (11/2 pounds), 
sliced in half lengthwise 


Zest of 1 lemon, finely grated 

1. To prepare the miso paste, combine the miso, 
sake, and sugar in a small saucepan. Warm over low 
heat, stirring until the sugar has dissolved. Set aside. 
2. Line a baking sheet with a paper towel; set aside. 
Heat the oil in a large skillet over high heat until 
almost smoking. Place the eggplant halves, cut side 
up, in the skillet. Cook for 5 minutes, turn over, and 
continue cooking for 1 to 2 minutes more, or until 
golden brown and very soft. Remove the eggplant 
halves from the skillet, and transfer to the prepared 
baking sheet. 
3. Using an offset spatula, spread 2 teaspoons 
reserved miso paste evenly over each eggplant 
half. Garnish with lemon zest. Serve warm. Cut 
the eggplant halves into pieces if serving as an 
hors d'oeuvre. 
366 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


spinach souffle 

SERVES 6 

Serve this souffle immediately in the dish, or let 
cool and unmold for a denser version. 

Cooking spray 

3 tablespoons bread crumbs 
10 ounces spinach, well washed, tough stems 
removed 
4 teaspoons unsalted butter 

3 tablespoons all-purpose flour 
11/2 cups skim milk 

1/2 teaspoon salt 
1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 


2 whole large eggs, separated 

1 cup freshly grated Parmesan cheese 
(2 ounces) 


2 large egg whites 
Pinch of cream of tartar 


1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Position the rack in 
the center of the oven. Coat a 2-quart souffle dish 
or 6 individual 8-ounce dishes with cooking spray. 
Coat with bread crumbs. Tap out excess; set aside. 
2. Fill a bowl with ice and water; set aside. Place a 
steamer basket in a large saucepan; fill with 1 inch 
water. Bring to a boil, and add the spinach. Cover, 
and steam until wilted, about 3 minutes. Drain, and 
plunge into the ice bath to stop the cooking. Let cool, 
and squeeze out excess water. Place the spinach in 
the bowl of a food processor; pulse until finely 
chopped; set aside. You should have about 1 cup. 
3. Melt the butter in a small saucepan over medium 
heat. Whisk in the flour, and cook, stirring constantly, 
for 3 minutes. Gradually whisk in the milk, 
and bring just to a simmer. Cook, stirring constantly, 
until slightly thickened, about 3 minutes. Stir in salt 
and pepper. Remove from heat, and set aside. 
4. In a large bowl, whisk 2 egg yolks until blended. 
Whisk in a little white sauce to temper the eggs, 
then add the remaining sauce, whisking until combined. 
Add the cooked spinach and grated cheese. 
5. Place the 4 egg whites and cream of tartar in the 
bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the whisk attachment. 
Beat on low until soft peaks begin to 
form. Increase speed to high; beat until stiff peaks 
form and the egg whites are smooth. 
6. Using a rubber spatula, transfer one-third of the 
egg whites to the spinach mixture; gently fold in 
until blended. Add the spinach mixture to the remaining 
egg whites; gently fold in until just combined. 
Pour into the prepared dish or dishes. 
7. Place the souffle in the oven; reduce heat to 375 degrees F. 
Bake until puffed and golden, 20 to 30 minutes. 
Serve immediately. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 149 CALORIES, 

7 G FAT, 85 MG CHOLESTEROL, 11 G CARBOHYDRATE, 

488 MG SODIUM, 11 G PROTEIN, 2 G FIBER 

eggplant fritters 

SERVES 4 

1 large eggplant (about 21/2 pounds) 
1/4 cup olive oil 


1 small garlic clove, minced 

2 tablespoons roughly chopped fresh 
flat-leaf parsley 


1/2 cup fresh or dry bread crumbs 
1 tablespoon grated Parmesan cheese 


1 large egg, lightly beaten 
1/4 teaspoon ground cumin 


1/4 teaspoon ground coriander 

3/4 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 
2 tablespoons canola oil 


1 head frisee, washed and dried 
1 tablespoon balsamic vinegar 


1. Preheat the oven to 425 degrees F. Cut the eggplant in 
half; place on a rimmed baking sheet. Drizzle with 
2 tablespoons olive oil. Place in the oven; cook until 
tender, about 40 minutes. When cool enough to 
handle, scoop the flesh into a strainer to drain. 
2. Transfer the drained eggplant to a bowl; add the 
garlic, parsley, bread crumbs, Parmesan, egg, cumin, 
coriander, salt, and pepper; stir to combine. Form 
the mixture into   patties. 
3. Heat the canola oil in a large skillet over medium 
heat. Add the patties, and cook until golden brown, 
about 2 minutes per side. Drain on paper towels. 
Place the frisee on a serving platter; drizzle with the 
remaining 2 tablespoons olive oil and balsamic 
vinegar. Top with the fritters. 
stewed baby artichokes 
with fava beans 

SERVES 6 

Frozen lima beans may be substituted for fava 
beans; start with the second step. 

11/2 pounds fava beans, shelled 
4 cups water 

3 tablespoons fresh lemon juice, plus a 
lemon half for rubbing the cut artichokes 


21/4 pounds (about 24) baby artichokes 
2 teaspoons olive oil 

1 shallot, peeled and finely chopped 
3 cloves garlic, peeled and lightly crushed 


1 teaspoon salt 
1/4 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper 


1/4 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes 
4 sprigs fresh thyme 


4 sprigs fresh flat-leaf parsley 

1. Fill a large bowl with ice and water; set aside. 
Bring a medium pot of water to a boil. Add the fava 
beans; blanch 30 seconds. Remove from water; 
place in the ice bath until cool. Peel the outer skin 
from the beans; set aside. 
2. Place 4 cups water in a large bowl; add the lemon 
juice; set aside. Remove the tough outer leaves from 
the artichokes; cut 1 inch from the tip of each artichoke. 
Trim and peel the stem of each; rub all over 
with the lemon half. Place in the lemon water. 
3. Heat the olive oil in a saucepan over medium 
heat. Add the shallot, garlic, salt, black pepper, and 
red pepper flakes; cook, stirring frequently, until 
368 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


the shallot is lightly browned, about 2 minutes. Add 
the artichokes, 1 cup lemon water, thyme, and parsley; 
bring to a simmer. Reduce heat to medium low, 
and cover; simmer until the artichokes are tender, 
about 14 minutes. 

4. Add the fava beans. Cook until the beans are tender, 
about 3 minutes more. Serve hot or at room 
temperature. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 197 CALORIES, 

3 G FAT, 0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 39 G CARBOHYDRATE, 

544 MG SODIUM, 15 G PROTEIN, 9 G FIBER 

corn on the cob with 
lime and melted butter 

SERVES 4 

Ears of corn, cut into small pieces, make a perfect 
summer side dish. Plan on one ear per person. 

4 ears corn, husked 

4 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

2 limes, cut into wedges 

1. Bring a large pot of water to a boil. Using a sharp 
knife, cut each ear of corn into 3 or 4 pieces, each 
about 11/2 inches long. Add the corn to the boiling 
water, and cook just until the corn is tender, 3 to 4 
minutes; this should not take much longer than the 
time required for the water to return to a boil. 
2. Drain the corn. Toss with the melted butter, and 
season with salt and pepper. Serve with lime 
wedges to squeeze directly onto corn. 
grilled ramps with asparagus 

SERVES 4 TO 6 AS A SIDE DISH 

Quickly grill ramps to make the most of their 
wild, earthy flavor. 

1 bunch (about 20) ramps 

1 bunch thin asparagus 

3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1. Heat a grill or grill pan on medium-high heat. 
Trim and discard the root hairs from the ramps. 
Trim the tough ends from the asparagus. 
2. Place the ramps and asparagus on a baking sheet 
or in a shallow baking dish. Drizzle with the olive 
oil, and toss to coat evenly. Season with salt and 
pepper, and toss to combine. 
3. Arrange the ramps and asparagus on the hot grill 
in a single layer. Grill until hot and grill marks appear, 
about 1 minute per side. Transfer to a platter, 
and serve hot or at room temperature. 
cauliflower with 
hazelnut brown butter 

SERVES 12 TO 14 

1 cup hazelnuts (filberts) 

3 small or 2 large heads cauliflower 
(about 31/2 pounds) 


Coarse salt 
10 tablespoons (11/4 sticks) unsalted butter 


2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 

2 tablespoons finely chopped chives 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Place the hazelnuts 
on a baking sheet; toast until fragrant, about 10 minutes. 
Transfer the nuts to a kitchen towel; rub off 
the loosened papery skins. Coarsely chop the nuts; 
set aside. 
2. Trim the stems of the cauliflower so they sit flat, 
keeping the head intact. Bring several inches of 
water to a boil in a large steamer or in a pot fitted 
with a rack; add salt to taste. Steam the cauliflower 
until just tender, about 10 minutes. Transfer to a 
serving platter. 
3. Combine the butter and hazelnuts in a small 
saucepan. Cook over medium heat until the butter 
turns brown, 3 to 4 minutes. Remove from heat, and 
add the lemon juice and chives. Season to taste with 
salt. Whisk to combine. Pour over the cauliflower, 
and serve immediately. 
SIDE DISHES 369 


pan-fried fennel 

SERVES 4 

For best results, use a heavy-bottomed saute pan. 

2 medium fennel bulbs 

1 cup all-purpose flour, for dredging 
11/2 cups fresh bread crumbs, for dredging 

2 teaspoons coarse salt, plus more 
for seasoning 


3/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper, 
plus more for seasoning 
3 large eggs 

11/2 cups vegetable oil, just enough to yield 
about 1/4 inch in the pan 

2 lemons, cut into wedges 

1. Remove the tops and fronds from the fennel 
bulbs. Slice each bulb in half widthwise. Cut each 
half into slices about 1/8 inch thick. 
2. Pour the flour into a medium bowl and the bread 
crumbs into another. Season with the salt and pepper. 
Crack the eggs into a third bowl; whisk until 
frothy. Season with salt and pepper. Dredge the fennel 
lightly in the flour, then in the egg, and then in 
the bread crumbs, shaking off excess after each step. 
3. Heat the oil in a large saute pan over medium 
heat. Check to make sure the oil is hot enough by 
tossing a pinch of flour into the pan. If the flour sizzles, 
the oil is ready. 
4. Fry the fennel slices until golden brown on each 
side, about 30 seconds per side, working in batches 
so as not to crowd the pan. Drain on paper towels; 
season with salt. Serve hot with lemon wedges. 
braised escarole with currants 

SERVES 6 

1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil 

1/2 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes 
4 garlic cloves, thinly sliced 


1 ounce slivered almonds (about 1/3 cup) 
4 anchovy fillets, rinsed (optional) 


1/4 cup dry sherry 

1/2 cup homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock, skimmed of fat 


1 tablespoon dark-brown sugar 

2 bunches (21/2 pounds) escarole, cleaned, 
drained, and torn into   pieces 


1/4 cup currants 

1. Heat the oil in a large, high-sided skillet over 
medium-low heat. Add the red pepper flakes; stir 
until fragrant, about 1 minute. Add the garlic and 
almonds; cook until light golden, about 3 minutes. 
Add the anchovies; stir until mashed and well combined 
with oil mixture. Add the sherry; cook until 
most of the liquid has evaporated. Add the stock 
and sugar; stir until the sugar has dissolved. 
2. Add the escarole in batches, tossing and adding 
more as it wilts until all has been added to the pan. 
Cover; cook over low heat, stirring occasionally, 
until wilted. 
3. Add the currants, and cook until the escarole is 
tender, about 10 minutes more. Serve. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 112 CALORIES, 5 G FAT, 

0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 11 G CARBOHYDRATE, 175 MG SODIUM, 

4 G PROTEIN, 6 G FIBER 

sauteed spinach with 
pecans and goat cheese 

SERVES 6 

2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

1 medium red onion (about 8 ounces), 
halved and thinly sliced 


11/4 pounds baby spinach 
2 tablespoons sherry vinegar 

1/2 cup coarsely chopped pecans 

1/4 cup soft goat cheese (about 2 ounces), 
crumbled 


370 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


1. Heat oil in a large skillet over medium heat until 
hot but not smoking. Add onion; cook, stirring occasionally, 
until onion has softened, about 5 minutes. 
Add spinach; cook, tossing, until spinach has 
started to wilt, about 2 minutes. Transfer to a serving 
platter. 
2. Add vinegar to skillet, and heat 5 seconds. Drizzle 
over spinach and onion. Sprinkle with pecans 
and goat cheese. Gently toss. Serve immediately. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 195 CALORIES, 14 G FAT, 

4 MG CHOLESTEROL, 16 G CARBOHYDRATE, 216 MG SODIUM, 

5 G PROTEIN, 6 G FIBER 

mustard greens and peas 

SERVES 8 

1/4 cup unsalted butter 

1 medium yellow onion (about 5 ounces), 
thinly sliced 


2 garlic cloves, sliced 

2 bunches mustard greens (about 2 
pounds), trimmed and cut crosswise 
into   strips 


1/2 cup homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

10 ounces partially thawed frozen or 
fresh shelled peas (13/4 cups) 


1. Melt butter in a large saucepan over medium 
heat. Add onion and garlic; cook, stirring occasionally, 
until translucent, about 2 minutes. Stir in 
greens and stock; season with salt and pepper. 
Cover; cook, stirring occasionally, until greens are 
wilted but not completely cooked, about 8 minutes. 
2. Stir in peas. (If you are using fresh peas, cook 
them 2 minutes in salted boiling water before 
adding to greens.) Cover, and cook, stirring occasionally, 
until peas are tender and bright green, 
about 5 minutes. Transfer to a serving dish with a 
slotted spoon. Serve immediately. 
spicy chickpeas 
with fresh green chiles 


SERVES 4 TO 6 

1/4 cup vegetable oil 

2 onions (about 7 ounces each), 1 chopped, 
1 thinly sliced for garnish 


1/2 teaspoon ground cumin 

1/2 teaspoon ground allspice 
1/2 teaspoon ground cinnamon 


1 teaspoon ground coriander 
1/8 teaspoon cayenne pepper 


3/4 teaspoon coarse salt 
2 garlic cloves, minced 
1 piece (1 inch) peeled fresh ginger, 
chopped (about 1 tablespoon) 


2 tablespoons tomato paste 

1 can (15 ounces) chickpeas, drained 
and rinsed 


2 to 4 fresh green chiles (such as 
Pinocchio's Nose or jalapeno), 1 seeded 
and finely chopped, remaining seeded 
and thinly sliced lengthwise for garnish 


1 ripe tomato, halved and thinly sliced, 
for garnish 


3 large pitas or naan (Indian bread), 
for serving 


8 ounces plain yogurt, for serving 
Lime wedges, for serving 


1. Heat oil in a medium skillet over medium heat. 
Add onion and cumin. Cook, stirring occasionally, 
until onion is light brown, about 5 minutes. Stir in 
allspice, cinnamon, coriander, cayenne pepper, and 
salt; cook 1 minute. 
2. Add garlic, ginger, and tomato paste to skillet. 
Cook about 4 minutes to dry out mixture. Stir in 
chickpeas and 1/4 cup water. Cover; cook until water 
evaporates and chickpeas are slightly softened, 
5 to 8 minutes. Stir in chopped chile. 
3. Transfer to a serving platter, garnish with slices 
of tomato, onion, and chile. Serve with bread, yogurt, 
and lime wedges. 
SIDE DISHES 371 


wilted dandelion greens 
with sweet onion 

SERVES 4 

2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

11/2 cups thinly sliced Vidalia onion 
1/8 teaspoon sugar 

1 garlic clove, sliced 
1 tablespoon sherry vinegar 


3 bunches dandelion greens, stemmed 
(about 7 ounces) 


1/8 teaspoon coarse salt 

Freshly ground pepper 

1. Heat oil in a medium skillet over medium heat. 
Add onion and sugar; cook, stirring occasionally, 
until onion is golden and has caramelized, about 
15 minutes. Add garlic; cook, stirring occasionally, 
2 minutes. Add vinegar; cook until vinegar is warm, 
about 1 minute. 
2. Add dandelion greens, and toss to combine. Cook 
until greens have just wilted, about 1 minute. Season 
with salt and pepper. Serve immediately. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 107 CALORIES, 7 G FAT, 

0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 10 G CARBOHYDRATE, 81 MG SODIUM, 

2 G PROTEIN, 2 G FIBER 

roasted cauliflower and capers 

SERVES 8 

2 large heads cauliflower (about 4 pounds 
total), cut into florets 


1/3 cup salt-packed capers, rinsed 

6 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil, 
plus more for serving 
Coarse salt 


1 tablespoon coarsely chopped or very 
small whole fresh marjoram leaves 


Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Divide cauliflower and 
capers between 2 rimmed baking sheets. Drizzle 
each with 3 tablespoons oil; toss to combine. Season 
with salt. Spread mixture in a single layer. Roast, 
stirring occasionally, until cauliflower is golden 
brown and tender, 30 to 40 minutes. Add marjoram; 
toss to combine. Serve warm or at room temperature, 
drizzled with oil. 

lemony baked onions 

SERVES 12 

6 medium yellow onions (6 to 8 ounces 
each), trimmed and halved crosswise, 
plus 1 small yellow onion, finely chopped 
(about 3/4 cup) 


Coarse salt 

1/2 cup (1 stick) unsalted butter 

31/2 cups fresh bread crumbs (from 
about 9 slices white bread) 

6 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 

1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees  F. Arrange the onion 
halves in a large, nonreactive baking dish; season 
with salt. Add 3/4 cup water to the dish. Cover the 
dish with foil. Bake the onions until tender, 40 to 45 
minutes. 
2. Meanwhile, melt butter in a large skillet over 
medium heat. Add chopped onion. Cook, stirring, 
until softened, about 4 minutes. Stir in the bread 
crumbs. Cook, stirring occasionally, until bread 
crumbs are golden, about 3 minutes. Add lemon 
juice; season with salt. 
3. Top the onions with the bread-crumb mixture, dividing 
evenly. Return to the oven, and bake until 
the topping is crisp and golden brown, 20 to 25 minutes 
more. 
sauteed zucchini and celery 

SERVES 12 

Use a mandoline or a very sharp knife to cut the 
celery and zucchini. 

1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil, plus 
more for drizzling 


2 medium white onions, thinly sliced 
6 medium celery stalks, peeled and 
cut lengthwise into  -thick slices 
2 teaspoons coarse salt 


6 medium zucchini, trimmed and 
cut lengthwise into  -thick slices 


Freshly ground pepper 

372 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


1. Heat oil in a large skillet over medium-high heat. 
Add onions, celery, and salt. Cover; cook, stirring 
occasionally, until onion is translucent, about 5 minutes. 
Add 1/2 cup water; cover, and cook until celery 
is tender, about 5 minutes. 
2. Stir in zucchini. Season with pepper. Cook, stirring 
once or twice, until zucchini is very tender, 5 
to 6 minutes. Using a slotted spoon, transfer vegetables 
to a serving platter, and drizzle with oil. 
Serve warm or at room temperature. 
caramelized turnips 
and shallots 

SERVES 12 

13/4 pounds white turnips, peeled and 
cut into 21/2 x 1  pieces 

13/4 pounds golden turnips or rutabagas, 
peeled, cut into 21/2 x 1  pieces 

10 shallots (about 10 ounces), peeled, 
root end intact 


2 tablespoons plus 2 teaspoons extra- 
virgin olive oil 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

3/4 cup red-wine vinegar 
2 bay leaves 
6 sprigs fresh thyme 


1/4 cup packed light-brown sugar 
3 tablespoons unsalted butter 


1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Put turnips, shallots, 
and oil on a rimmed baking sheet. Season with salt 
and pepper; toss. Spread in a single layer. Roast 
until tender and golden brown, about 35 minutes. 
2. Put vinegar, bay leaves, and thyme in a small 
saucepan. Bring to a simmer; cook until reduced by 
about half, about 10 minutes. Add sugar and 1/2 teaspoon 
salt; stir to dissolve. Add butter, and cook 
over medium heat until reduced to a syrupy glaze, 
about 10 minutes. Discard thyme. Pour over roasted 
vegetables; toss to coat. Serve immediately. 
cauliflower gratin with endive 

SERVES 8 

1/4 cup (1/2 stick) unsalted butter, 
plus more for dish 


2 heads Belgian endive, cut lengthwise 
into sixths 


1 cup fregola Sarda (semolina pasta) 
or Israeli (large pearl) couscous 


2 large heads cauliflower (about 2 pounds), 
cut into florets 

1/4 cup all-purpose flour 
3 cups milk 


2 tablespoons finely chopped fresh 
marjoram or oregano 


1 teaspoon coarse salt 

1/4 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper 
1/8 teaspoon cayenne pepper 


3 cups finely grated Gruyere cheese 
(about 10 ounces) 


1/4 cup fresh bread crumbs 

1/4 cup coarsely grated Parmesan 
cheese (about 2 ounces) 


1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees  F, with rack in lower 
third. Butter a 11/2-quart, deep, wide ovenproof dish. 
Put endive in bottom of dish. Arrange pasta or couscous 
over endive. Top with cauliflower. 
2. Melt butter in a medium saucepan over medium 
heat. Whisk in flour. Reduce heat to medium-low. 
Cook, stirring, 2 minutes. Whisk in milk; cook, 
whisking, until mixture thickens, about 4 minutes. 
Remove from heat. Whisk in marjoram, salt, black 
pepper, and cayenne. Whisk in Gruyere until 
smooth. Pour over cauliflower. Sprinkle with bread 
crumbs. Set dish on a baking sheet. 
3. Bake 30 minutes. Sprinkle with Parmesan. Reduce 
temperature to 350 degrees F; bake until cauliflower 
is tender, about 40 minutes. (If browning too 
quickly, tent with foil.) Transfer to a wire rack; let 
cool 10 minutes before serving. 
SIDE DISHES 373 








green bean casserole 
with fried shallots 

SERVES 8 

6 tablespoons unsalted butter, plus 
more for dish 


1 medium onion (about 6 ounces), 
cut into   dice 


1 red bell pepper, ribs and seeds removed, 
flesh cut into   dice 


1 pound button mushrooms, trimmed 
and quartered 


2 teaspoons coarse salt 
1/2 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper 


11/2 pounds green beans, trimmed and 
cut into   pieces 

6 tablespoons all-purpose flour 

2 cups whole milk 
Pinch of cayenne pepper 


Pinch of grated nutmeg 
1 cup finely grated Parmesan cheese 


1/4 cup fresh bread crumbs 
1/4 cup canola oil 


4 shallots, cut crosswise into  thick 
rings 


1. Melt 2 tablespoons butter in a large skillet over 
medium heat. Add onion, and cook, stirring occasionally, 
until beginning to soften, about 4 minutes. 
Add bell pepper and mushrooms, and cook, stirring 
occasionally, until softened and most of the liquid 
has evaporated, 8 to 10 minutes. Season with 1 teaspoon 
salt and 1/4 teaspoon black pepper. Remove 
from heat. Let cool completely. 
2. Bring a medium saucepan of water to a boil. Add 
beans; cook until bright green and just tender, 4 to 
5 minutes. Drain, and plunge into an ice-water bath 
to stop cooking. Drain beans, and dry. Toss with 
mushroom mixture; set aside. 
3. Melt the remaining 4 tablespoons butter in a 
medium saucepan over medium heat. Add 1/4 cup 
flour; whisk constantly until mixture begins to turn 
golden, about 2 minutes. Pour in milk; continue 
whisking until mixture thickens, 4 to 6 minutes. Stir 
in cayenne, nutmeg, and remaining teaspoon salt 
and 1/4 teaspoon black pepper. Remove from heat; 
let cool completely, stirring occasionally. Pour over 
bean mixture, and toss. 

4. Butter a 13 x 9-inch baking dish. Spread half of 
the bean mixture into dish. Sprinkle with half of the 
Parmesan, and then top with remaining bean mixture. 
Combine remaining Parmesan and bread 
crumbs; sprinkle over top. Cover with foil, and refrigerate 
until ready to serve (up to 1 day); bring to 
room temperature before heating. 
5. Heat oil in a medium skillet over medium-high 
heat. Toss shallots with remaining 2 tablespoons 
flour. Fry shallots in 2 batches, turning frequently, 
until golden brown, about 3 minutes. Using a slotted 
spoon, transfer shallots to paper towels to drain; 
let cool completely. The shallots can be stored in 
an airtight container at room temperature up to 
1 day. 
6. Preheat the broiler, with rack about 8 inches from 
heat. Cook casserole, covered, until mixture is bubbling 
and heated through, about 10 minutes. Uncover, 
and cook until top is golden brown, about 30 
seconds. Remove from oven. Sprinkle with fried 
shallots. Serve immediately. 
delicata squash 
with hot pepper glaze 


SERVES 8 

1/4 cup hot pepper jelly 
3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 


1 garlic clove, minced 

4 medium delicata squashes (about 3 
pounds total), cut lengthwise into  thick 
wedges, seeds discarded 


2 teaspoons coarse salt 

Freshly ground pepper 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Stir jelly, oil, and garlic 
in a small bowl. Place squashes in a large bowl; 
add jelly mixture and salt. Season with pepper; toss. 
2. Divide squash between 2 rimmed baking sheets. 
Roast until tender and bottoms are golden brown, 
30 to 35 minutes. Serve immediately. 
374 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


pan-roasted balsamic onions 

SERVES 8 TO 10 

10 ounces white pearl onions 

10 ounces red pearl onions 
10 ounces cipollini 


5 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


21/4 pounds leeks, white and pale-green parts 
only, halved lengthwise and rinsed well 

1 cup homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock 


1/4 cup balsamic vinegar 
2 tablespoons unsalted butter 


1/2 teaspoon fresh thyme leaves 

1. Bring a medium saucepan of water to a boil. Add 
onions and cipollini, and boil 1 minute. Drain. Let 
stand until cool enough to handle. Peel, leaving root 
and stem ends intact. Transfer to a large bowl. Add 
2 tablespoons oil, 1 teaspoon salt, and 1/4 teaspoon 
pepper; toss. 
2. Toss leeks in a bowl with 1 tablespoon oil and 1/2 
teaspoon salt. Heat 1 tablespoon oil in a large skillet 
over medium-high heat. Add leeks; cook, stirring 
occasionally, until slightly tender and lightly 
browned, about 5 minutes. Transfer to a plate. 
3. Add remaining tablespoon oil and the onion mixture 
to skillet. Cook, stirring occasionally, until 
browned, 5 to 7 minutes. 
4. Reduce heat to medium-low. Add stock, vinegar, 
and leeks; cover, and cook, stirring occasionally, 
until onions are tender, about 30 minutes. Uncover; 
add butter. Raise heat to high. Cook, shaking skillet 
occasionally, until liquid reduces to a glaze and 
coats onions, 4 to 5 minutes. 
5. Transfer to a serving dish. Sprinkle with thyme, 
and season with salt and pepper. Serve immediately, 
or refrigerate in an airtight container up to 1 day; 
reheat in a 300 degrees F oven to serve. 
braised apples 
with saffron and cider 


SERVES 10 TO 12 

This recipe can be made a day ahead and refrigerated; 
reheat before serving. 

1/4 cup (1/2 stick) unsalted butter 

1 large shallot, thinly sliced into rings 
6 apples (about 2 pounds), such as Gala or 
Winesap, quartered and seeded 
1/4 teaspoon saffron threads, crumbled 


11/2 cups homemade or low-sodium store-
bought chicken stock 

11/2 cups apple cider 

1/4 cup dry sherry 
3 tablespoons dried currants 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1. Melt butter in a large saucepan over medium 
heat. Add shallot, and cook, stirring often, until soft, 
about 4 minutes. Add apples, and turn to coat. Stir 
in saffron, stock, cider, sherry, and currants, and season 
with salt. Bring to a boil. Reduce heat to low, 
and cover. Simmer, stirring occasionally, until apples 
are tender, 12 to 15 minutes. 
2. Using a slotted spoon, transfer apples to a bowl. 
Raise heat to medium-high, and cook sauce until 
reduced by half, about 10 minutes more. Season 
with pepper. Pour sauce over apples. Serve warm 
or at room temperature. 
SIDE DISHES 375 


leek and gruyere bread pudding 

SERVES 10 TO 12 

This recipe can be made a day ahead and refrigerated; 
reheat before serving. 

3 tablespoons unsalted butter, plus more 
for baking dish 


1 bunch leeks (4 or 5), white and 
pale-green parts only, thinly sliced 
crosswise, rinsed well 


2 garlic cloves, crushed 

1/3 cup dry white wine 

3 cups heavy cream 

2 cups whole milk 

1/2 teaspoon freshly grated nutmeg 

Pinch of cayenne pepper 
2 teaspoons coarse salt 


1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 

5 large eggs plus 2 large egg yolks, 
lightly beaten 


1 loaf day-old brioche (about 1 pound),
crusts removed, cut into   slices 
and then halved crosswise 


2 cups grated Gruyere cheese 

1 cup grated Parmesan cheese 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees  F. Butter a 10-inch 
(10-cup) round baking dish. Melt butter in a 
medium saucepan over medium heat. Add leeks 
and garlic; cook, stirring frequently, until soft, about 
10 minutes. Add wine, and bring to a boil. Cook 
until wine is reduced by half. Transfer half of the 
leek mixture to a bowl, and reserve. 
2. Whisk cream, milk, nutmeg, cayenne, salt, and 
pepper into leek mixture in pan; bring to a simmer. 
Add 1/2 cup hot cream-leek mixture to eggs and 
yolks in a medium bowl, whisking. Whisk in another 
cup cream-leek mixture; return egg-leek mixture to 
pan. Cook, whisking, until thickened, 4 to 5 minutes. 
3. Arrange 8 or 9 pieces of bread in prepared dish. 
Pour 2 cups egg-leek mixture over bread. Sprinkle 
half the reserved leeks and half the cheeses over 
bread. Let stand 10 minutes. Arrange remaining 
bread in a slightly overlapping circle on top, and 
then add remaining egg-leek mixture. Sprinkle with 
remaining leeks and cheeses. Let stand 10 minutes. 

4. Cover dish loosely with foil, and place in a small 
roasting pan. Add enough hot water to reach 
halfway up sides of dish. Bake until golden brown 
and set, about 55 minutes. Remove foil, and bake 
until deep golden brown, about 20 minutes more. 
Let cool in dish on a wire rack. Serve warm or at 
room temperature. 
brown-sugar-spiced 
red cabbage 

SERVES 10 TO 12 

This recipe can be made a day ahead and refrigerated; 
reheat before serving. 

1/4 cup bacon drippings or unsalted butter 

1 head red cabbage, very thinly sliced 

1 red onion, halved lengthwise and thinly 
sliced 


1/2 cup cider vinegar 

1/2 cup port 

1/4 cup packed light-brown sugar 

1/2 cinnamon stick 

1 fresh bay leaf 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1. Heat drippings in a large stockpot over medium 
heat. Add cabbage and onion; cook, stirring occasionally, 
until tender, about 10 minutes. 
2. Add vinegar, port, sugar, cinnamon, and bay leaf; 
bring to a boil. Reduce heat; cover, and simmer, stirring 
occasionally, until cabbage is soft, about 1 hour. 
Season with salt and pepper. 
376 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


farro, orange, and 
pine nut dressing 

SERVES 10 TO 12 

You can make the dressing through step 2 a day 
ahead; refrigerate in an airtight container. Just before 
serving, stir in oranges, pine nuts, and parsley. 

1 tablespoon unsalted butter 

1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil 
2 shallots, finely chopped (about 1/2 cup) 


2 celery stalks, finely chopped 

1/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons coarsely chopped 
fresh flat-leaf parsley 


1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon finely 
chopped fresh sage 


2 teaspoons fennel seeds, coarsely chopped 
1 dried chile, crumbled 

2 cups farro 
31/2 cups homemade or low-sodium store-
bought turkey or chicken stock 
1/2 cup dry white wine 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

2 navel oranges, peel and pith removed, 
flesh cut into segments 


1/4 cup pine nuts, toasted 

1. Melt butter with the oil in a medium saucepan 
over medium heat. Add shallots and celery, and 
cook, stirring often, until soft, about 3 minutes. Add 
2 tablespoons parsley, the sage, fennel seeds, and 
chile, and cook 1 minute. 
2. Stir in farro, stock, and wine, and bring to a boil. 
Season with 1 teaspoon salt. Reduce heat to low; 
cover, and cook until farro is tender and has absorbed 
the liquid, about 30 minutes. 
3. When ready to serve, stir in orange segments, 
pine nuts, and remaining 1/4 cup parsley. Season 
with salt and pepper. 
matchstick fries 

SERVES 4 

Using a mandoline to slice the potatoes is quick 
and easy. You can do so up to four hours ahead; 
to prevent browning, place matchsticks in a bowl 
of cold water in the refrigerator until ready to use, 
then pat them dry with paper towels. 

Vegetable oil cooking spray 

2 medium russet potatoes (about 11/2 
pounds), cut into matchsticks 


3 tablespoons olive oil 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1. Preheat the oven to 425 degrees F. Coat 2 baking sheets 
with cooking spray; set aside. Toss together potatoes, 
oil, and 1 teaspoon salt in a bowl. Arrange potatoes 
in a single layer on prepared baking sheets. 
2. Bake, turning potatoes with a metal spatula 2 or 
3 times and rotating sheets halfway through, until 
potatoes are crisp and edges turn golden brown, 18 
to 20 minutes. Arrange potatoes on a large piece 
of parchment paper; let cool 5 minutes. Season with 
salt and pepper. 
polenta 

MAKES 21/4 CUPS 

We served the polenta with Braised Lamb Shanks 
with Tomato and Fennel (page 260), but it is 
equally delicious with chicken, veal, or pork, or as 
part of a vegetarian meal with a salad. 

4 cups cold water 

1 teaspoon coarse salt 

1 cup polenta 

2 tablespoons unsalted butter 

Bring the water to a boil in a medium saucepan; add 
the salt. Stirring constantly, slowly add the polenta, 
letting the grains pass through your fingers in a 
steady stream. Reduce heat; simmer, stirring constantly, 
until the polenta is tender but not mushy, 
30 to 35 minutes. Remove from heat, and stir in the 
butter. Serve hot. 

SIDE DISHES 377 


polenta wedges 

SERVES 8 

You can make the polenta through step 1 ahead 
of time; let cool, then cover and refrigerate. 

3 cups nonfat milk 

3 tablespoons finely chopped fresh chives 
2 garlic cloves, peeled and minced 


1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/4 teaspoon paprika 


3/4 cup quick-cooking polenta 
2 ounces Parmesan cheese, grated 
1 tablespoon unsalted butter 
Olive oil cooking spray 


1. Combine the milk, chives, garlic, salt, and paprika 
in a medium saucepan, and bring to a boil 
over high heat. While whisking, slowly sprinkle in 
the polenta. Reduce heat to medium-low; cook, stirring 
occasionally with a wooden spoon, until the 
polenta has thickened, 5 to 8 minutes. Add the 
Parmesan and butter; stir until combined. Spread 
the polenta evenly in an 8  springform pan; 
let rest until completely set, about 45 minutes at 
room temperature. 
2. Preheat the broiler. Remove the outer ring from 
the springform pan. Cut the polenta into 8 wedges. 
Coat wedges with olive oil spray, and place on a 
rack in the oven several inches underneath the 
broiler. Broil the polenta until golden brown on top 
and heated through, about 8 minutes. Serve. 
israeli couscous 
and fall vegetable stuffing 


SERVES 8 TO 10; MAKES ABOUT 8 CUPS 

(ENOUGH FOR ONE 18-POUND TURKEY) 

1 small acorn squash (about 11/2 pounds), 
halved and seeded 


1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

2 small turnips, peeled and cut 
into   cubes 


1 celery root, peeled and cut 
into   cubes 


2 tablespoons unsalted butter 

3/4 cup finely chopped shallots 
1/2 teaspoon ground coriander 
1/4 teaspoon ground cumin 
1/4 teaspoon hot smoked paprika 


10 ounces Israeli couscous (about 2 cups) 

13/4 cups homemade or low-sodium 
store-bought chicken stock 

1 fresh bay leaf 
2 tablespoons chopped fresh thyme 


1/2 cup golden raisins 
1/2 cup sliced almonds with skins, toasted 


1/4 cup chopped fresh flat-leaf parsley 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Drizzle the squash with 
1 tablespoon oil; season with salt and pepper. Place, 
cut sides down, on a rimmed baking sheet; roast 
10 minutes. 
2. Meanwhile, toss the turnips and celery root with 
2 tablespoons oil; season with salt and pepper. Place 
on the baking sheet with the squash. Continue 
roasting, stirring once or twice, until the vegetables 
are tender and golden brown, about 30 minutes. 
3. Meanwhile, heat the butter and remaining tablespoon 
oil in a medium saucepan over medium 
heat until the butter is melted. Add the shallots; 
cook until softened, about 3 minutes. Stir in the coriander, 
cumin, and paprika; cook until fragrant, 
about 1 minute. 
4. Stir in the couscous, stock, bay leaf, 1 tablespoon 
thyme, and 1 teaspoon salt. Bring to a boil. Cover; 
reduce heat to low. Cook until the couscous is tender 
but al dente and the liquid is absorbed, about 
6 minutes. Remove from heat. Let stand, covered, 
2 minutes. Fluff with a fork. 
5. Peel the squash; cut the flesh into   cubes. 
Stir together the couscous, vegetables, raisins, almonds, 
parsley, and remaining tablespoon thyme; 
season with salt and pepper. Serve, or immediately 
pack loosely in the turkey cavity, and cook until 
an instant-read thermometer inserted into the center 
of the stuffing registers 165 degrees F. 
378 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


chestnut and sausage stuffing 

SERVES 12; MAKES ABOUT 10 CUPS 
(ENOUGH FOR ONE 16-TO 18-POUND TURKEY) 

1 loaf day-old rustic Italian bread 
(about 1 pound), trimmed of crust and cutinto   cubes (about 8 cups) 

1 pound fresh chestnuts 
1 pound sweet Italian sausage 
1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil 
2 medium onions, finely chopped 
4 celery stalks, finely chopped 
4 garlic cloves, finely chopped 


1/2 cup dry white wine 

1/2 cup homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock 


1 tablespoon chopped fresh thyme 

2 tablespoons chopped fresh sage 

2 tablespoons chopped fresh flat- 
leaf parsley 


2 teaspoons coarse salt 
Freshly ground pepper 


2 large eggs, lightly beaten 
Unsalted butter, for baking dish 


1. Let the bread cubes stand on a baking sheet at 
room temperature 3 hours to dry. 
Improvise, using the following 
formula, to come up with your 
own stuffing recipes. 
2. Lay each chestnut flat on a work surface, and cut 
an X in the pointed tip of the shell with a paring or 
chestnut knife. Bring a medium pot of water to a 
boil. Boil the chestnuts 2 minutes; remove the pot 
from the heat. Remove the chestnuts with a slotted 
spoon; peel away the shells. Quarter the nutmeat; 
transfer to a large bowl. Add the bread. 
3. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees  F. Split the sausages; 
scrape the meat into a large saute pan set over 
medium heat; crumble with a fork. Cook, stirring 
occasionally, until cooked through, about 7 minutes. 
Add the oil; swirl the pan. Add the onions, celery, 
and garlic. Reduce heat to medium-low. Cook, 
stirring occasionally, until the vegetables are soft, 
15 to 17 minutes. Add to the bread mixture. 
4. Add the wine to the pan. Scraping up any brown 
bits from bottom with a wooden spoon, cook over 
medium heat until the wine is reduced by half. Add 
to the bread mixture. 
5. Add the stock to the bread mixture; toss. Add the 
thyme, sage, and parsley. Add the salt, and season 
with pepper. Stir in the eggs. 
6. To bake the stuffing: Place the stuffing in a buttered 
9 x 1  baking dish; cover with foil. Bake 
30 minutes; remove the foil. Bake until golden 
brown, about 25 minutes. To cook in a turkey: Stuff 
as directed (page 379). Place remaining 5 cups stuffing 
in a buttered 8-inch-square baking dish; bake 
as directed above. 
wild rice and corn stuffing 

SERVES 8; MAKES ABOUT 7 CUPS 

(ENOUGH FOR ONE 18-POUND TURKEY) 

2 cups wild rice 
Coarse salt 


2 tablespoons corn or vegetable oil 
2 small red onions, cut into thin rounds 


3 garlic cloves, minced (1 tablespoon) 

2 fresh serrano or jalapeno chiles, 
thinly sliced 


1 cup frozen corn kernels, thawed 
1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 


2 tablespoons fresh lime juice 

1. Bring 5 cups water to a boil in a medium saucepan; 
add the rice and 1 tablespoon salt. Cover; reduce 
heat. Cook the rice until al dente, 35 to 40 minutes 
(not all the water will be absorbed). Drain well. 
2. Heat the oil in a large skillet over medium-high 
heat until hot but not smoking. Add the onions and 
garlic; cook, stirring, until soft, about 2 minutes. Add 
the chiles; cook 30 seconds. 
3. Stir the onion mixture, corn, pepper, and lime 
juice into the rice; season with salt. Serve, or immediately 
pack loosely in a turkey cavity, and cook 
until an instant-read thermometer inserted into the 
center of the stuffing registers 165 degrees F. 
savory twice-baked 
sweet potatoes 

SERVES 6 

For a less formal but equally appealing presentation, 
you can spoon rather than pipe the filling 
into the shells. 

3 medium sweet potatoes (11/2 to 2 pounds), 
scrubbed well 


4 ounces smoked bacon, sliced 
2 tablespoons dark-brown sugar 


3 tablespoons unsalted butter, softened 
2 small shallots, finely minced 


1 teaspoon minced fresh rosemary, 
plus more for garnish 


1 large egg 
2 tablespoons heavy cream 


2 ounces Gruyere cheese, finely grated, 
plus more for garnish 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Place the sweet potatoes 
on a parchment-lined baking sheet; bake until 
tender when pierced with a paring knife, about 45 
minutes. Remove from the oven; let cool slightly. 
380 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


2. Line a rimmed baking sheet with foil; fit with a 
wire rack. Arrange the bacon strips on the rack, and 
sprinkle with the brown sugar. Cook until well 
glazed and crisp, 12 to 15 minutes. Remove from the 
oven; let cool slightly, and roughly chop. Set aside. 
3. Melt 1 tablespoon butter in a small skillet over 
medium heat. Add the shallots; saute until soft and 
fragrant, about 2 minutes. Add the rosemary, and 
cook 1 minute more. Remove from heat, and set aside. 
4. Slice each potato in half lengthwise. Carefully 
scoop out the flesh, leaving about a   border 
all around the potato halves; set the halves aside on 
a baking sheet. 
5. Place the flesh in the bowl of an electric mixer 
fitted with the paddle attachment. Add the remaining 
2 tablespoons butter and the reserved shallot 
mixture, egg, cream, and Gruyere. Mix well until 
combined. Season with salt and pepper. 
6. Transfer the mixture to a pastry bag fitted with 
a star tip; pipe into the reserved halves. Bake until 
golden, about 20 minutes. Remove from the oven. 
To serve, garnish with the Gruyere, rosemary, and 
reserved bacon. 
spicy sweet potatoes with lime 

SERVES 6 

4 medium sweet potatoes (about 21/2 
pounds), scrubbed well 


2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 
2 teaspoons ground cumin 


1 teaspoon hot paprika 
1 teaspoon ground ginger 


Coarse salt and freshly ground 
white pepper 


Lime wedges, for serving 

Yogurt Dipping Sauce, for serving 
(recipe follows) 


1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Heat a baking sheet 
in the oven until hot, about 15 minutes. Meanwhile, 
slice the sweet potatoes in half lengthwise; slice 
each half into 3 wedges. Place in a medium bowl, 
and toss with the oil, cumin, paprika, and ginger. 
Season with salt and pepper. 
2. When the baking sheet is hot, remove from the 
oven. Arrange the sweet potatoes in a single layer 
on the sheet. Return to the oven; cook until the potatoes 
are crisp and golden on the bottom, about 15 
minutes. Turn, and continue cooking until golden 
all over, about 15 minutes more. 
3. Remove from the oven; season with salt and pepper. 
Serve with limes and sauce. 
yogurt dipping sauce 

MAKES ABOUT 1 CUP 

1 cup plain yogurt 

3 tablespoons roughly chopped 
fresh cilantro 


2 tablespoons chopped toasted walnuts 

1 tablespoon fresh lime juice 
1/2 teaspoon ground cumin 


Coarse salt 

Combine all the ingredients in a small bowl. Cover 
with plastic wrap, and refrigerate until ready to 
serve, up to 1 day. 

SIDE DISHES 381 


potato, zucchini, 
and tomato gratin 

SERVES 4 

5 teaspoons extra-virgin olive oil 

2 garlic cloves, minced 
1 pound Yukon Gold potatoes, peeled 


1 medium zucchini (about 8 ounces) 

2 vine-ripened or other ripe tomatoes 
(3/4 pound), sliced into   rounds 


1/4 teaspoon coarse salt 
Freshly ground pepper 


1 teaspoon finely chopped fresh thyme 

2 ounces finely grated Cantal or Cheddar 
cheese 


1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F, with the rack in the 
upper third. Coat a 9 x 1  gratin dish with 1 
teaspoon oil, and sprinkle with the garlic. Using a 
mandoline or a very sharp knife, slice the potatoes 
and zucchini as thinly as possible into rounds. 
Arrange the potatoes, zucchini, and tomatoes in 
overlapping layers around the prepared dish, and 
sprinkle with the salt and pepper. Drizzle with the 
remaining 4 teaspoons oil, and sprinkle with the 
thyme and cheese. 
2. Cover with foil; bake until the potatoes are tender, 
35 to 45 minutes. Remove the foil; continue baking 
until the top is golden brown, about 25 minutes 
more. Remove from the oven, and serve immediately. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 175 CALORIES, 

11 G FAT, 15 MG CHOLESTEROL, 14 G CARBOHYDRATE, 

255 MG SODIUM, 8 G PROTEIN, 5 G FIBER 

baby red potatoes with cilantro 

SERVES 20 TO 25 

Because the potatoes are cooked and served 
whole, be sure to select those that are similar in 
size to ensure they cook evenly. 

10 pounds small red new potatoes 

Coarse salt 
1 cup extra-virgin olive oil 


Freshly ground pepper 
2 cups loosely packed fresh cilantro leaves 


1. Place the unpeeled potatoes in a large saucepan, 
and cover with cold water. Bring the water to a boil 
over high heat, and add salt. Reduce heat to a simmer, 
and cook until the potatoes are tender when 
pierced with a fork, 15 to 20 minutes. Transfer to a 
colander, and drain. 
2. Place the potatoes in a large serving bowl. Drizzle 
with the olive oil, and season with salt and pepper. 
Toss in the cilantro leaves just before serving. 
mashed potatoes and peas 

SERVES 6 

2 pounds medium russet and/or Yukon 
Gold potatoes 


1 tablespoon coarse salt, plus more for 
seasoning 
5 tablespoons unsalted butter 


11/2 pounds garden peas, shelled (11/2 cups) 
1 cup milk 
Freshly ground pepper 

1. Peel and cut the potatoes crosswise into 1 thick 
slices. Place the slices in a medium saucepan, 
and cover with cold water. Bring to a boil over 
medium heat; add 1 tablespoon salt. Reduce to a 
low simmer, and cook until the potatoes are tender 
when pierced with a knife, about 15 minutes. Transfer 
to a colander; let drain. 
2. Meanwhile, melt 1 tablespoon butter in a small 
saute pan over medium-low heat. Add the peas, and 
cook until they are tender and bright green, 4 to 5 
minutes. Transfer to the jar of a blender, and add 
the milk; blend until the mixture is smooth and 
combined. 
3. While still hot, pass the potatoes through a ricer 
or food mill into a large heatproof bowl. Stir with a 
wooden spoon until they are smooth, about 1 
minute. Using a whisk, incorporate the remaining 
4 tablespoons butter. Whisking constantly, add the 
pureed pea mixture, and season with salt and pepper. 
Serve immediately, or keep warm over a pan of 
simmering water. 
382 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


baked potato slices 

SERVES 4 

A Japanese or French mandoline is great for slicing 
vegetables uniformly-anywhere from very 
thin to thick-and takes much less time than slicing 
by hand with a knife. 

11/2 pounds Yukon Gold potatoes, peeled, 
very thinly sliced 

2 tablespoons olive oil, plus more for pan 

2 teaspoons fresh thyme leaves 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F, and place the rack in 
the middle of the oven. In a medium bowl, combine 
the potatoes, olive oil, and thyme. Season with salt 
and pepper, and toss until well coated. 
2. Generously brush a large rimmed baking sheet 
with olive oil, and overlap the potato slices just 
slightly. Bake until the potatoes are golden brown 
and crisp in places, about 30 minutes. 
pommes frites 

SERVES 8 TO 10 

Make sure to use at least a 5-quart saucepan so 
the oil won't bubble over. 

8 russet potatoes 

2 to 3 quarts vegetable oil 

1 tablespoon coarse salt 

1. Peel the potatoes, if desired; cut into  -thick 
matchsticks. Place in a bowl of cold water to soak 
for 10 minutes. 
2. Heat the oil in a large saucepan (at least 5 quarts) 
to 325 degrees F. Remove the potatoes from water; dry very 
well with paper towels. Working in batches, blanch 
potatoes 2 minutes (they will not take on any color). 
Drain well; cool completely on pans lined with 
paper towels. 
3. Raise the heat of the oil to 375 degrees F. Preheat the oven 
to 250 degrees  F. Working in batches, fry potatoes until 
golden, about 3 minutes. Drain well; place on a 
rimmed baking sheet. Sprinkle with salt; keep warm 
in the oven while frying the remaining potatoes. 
Serve immediately. 
roasted fingerling potatoes 
with seasoned salt 

SERVES 4 

A copper gratin dish or cast-iron skillet is ideal 
for roasting potatoes, but a rimmed baking sheet 
works equally well. To ensure the potatoes cook 
evenly, slice larger ones in half lengthwise and 
leave smaller ones whole. 

2 teaspoons coarse salt 

1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 
1/4 teaspoon finely chopped fresh thyme 


1/4 teaspoon finely chopped fresh rosemary 
11/2 pounds fingerling potatoes, scrubbed 

1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil 

1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Heat a large ovenproof 
gratin dish or skillet in the oven 15 minutes. Combine 
the salt, pepper, thyme, and rosemary in a 
small bowl. 
2. Toss the potatoes in a medium bowl with the 
olive oil. Sprinkle generously with the seasoned salt 
mixture, and arrange the potatoes in a single layer 
in the preheated pan. Roast until they are golden 
on the outside and tender when pierced with a 
sharp knife, 25 to 30 minutes. Remove from the 
oven, and serve hot with additional seasoned salt 
on the side. 
oven-roasted new potatoes 

SERVES 10 

3 pounds mixed small new potatoes, 
unpeeled 


1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil 

11/2 teaspoons coarse salt 
1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 

Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Toss the potatoes with 
the oil, salt, and pepper in a large bowl until well 
coated. Transfer to a 9 x 1  metal baking dish 
and spread in a single layer. Roast, stirring occasionally, 
until tender, about 1 hour 15 minutes. 

SIDE DISHES 383 


baked potato chips 

SERVES 4 

Vegetable oil cooking spray 

2 pounds russet potatoes, cut into  thick 
slices 


3 tablespoons olive oil 
Pinch of cayenne pepper 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Lightly coat 2 rimmed 
baking sheets with cooking spray; set aside. Put the 
potatoes, oil, and cayenne in a large bowl; season 
with salt and black pepper. Toss to combine. 
2. Arrange the potato slices on the prepared baking 
sheets, spacing them 1/4 inch apart. Bake, rotating 
the sheets halfway through, until the potatoes 
are crisp and golden brown, about 30 minutes. 
Spread the potatoes on parchment paper; let dry 5 
minutes. Sprinkle with salt, if desired. 
mashed potatoes with olive oil 

SERVES 10 

31/2 pounds small Yukon Gold potatoes 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1/2 cup extra-virgin olive oil, plus more 
for serving 


Cover the potatoes with cold water in a large pot; 
add salt. Bring to a boil. Cook until tender when 
pierced with a fork, about 10 minutes; drain. Mash 
with a potato masher. Stir in the oil; season with salt 
and pepper. Drizzle with oil, and serve immediately. 

mashed squash and 
potatoes with amaretti 

SERVES 12 

2 pounds russet potatoes, peeled and cut 
into   cubes (about 6 cups) 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

3 pounds buttercup squash (about 1 small), 
peeled, seeded, and cut into   cubes 
(about 8 cups) 


6 tablespoons unsalted butter, plus more 
for the baking dish 


1/2 cup heavy cream 

1/4 teaspoon freshly ground nutmeg 

1/2 cup finely grated Parmigiano- 
Reggiano cheese 


10 amaretti (Italian almond cookies), 
crushed into fine crumbs (about 3/4 cup) 


1. Cover the potatoes with cold water in a medium 
saucepan. Bring to a boil; add salt. Reduce heat to 
medium-high; cook the potatoes until soft, about 
25 minutes. In another medium saucepan, cover the 
squash with cold water. Bring to a boil; add salt. Reduce 
heat to medium-high; cook until soft, 15 to 20 
minutes. Drain the potatoes and squash thoroughly. 
2. Force the potatoes through a ricer into a bowl. In 
a separate bowl, mash the squash with a potato 
masher; stir in the potatoes. 
3. Bring 4 tablespoons butter and the cream to a 
simmer in a small saucepan over medium heat. Add 
1/2 teaspoon salt and the nutmeg. Season with pepper. 
Stir the cream mixture and 1/3 cup cheese into 
the potato mixture. Season with salt and pepper, if 
desired. Spoon into a buttered 10-inch round baking 
dish. 
4. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Sprinkle the mixture 
with the crushed cookies and remaining cheese. 
Dot the topping with the remaining 2 tablespoons 
butter. Bake until the topping is just browned, 20 to 
30 minutes. 
384 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


classic potato gratin 

SERVES 6 TO 8 

Unsalted butter, for the baking dish 

1 cup heavy cream 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


Pinch of freshly grated nutmeg 

2 pounds Yukon Gold potatoes, peeled and 
thinly sliced into rounds 


2 cups coarsely grated Gruyere cheese 
(about 6 ounces) 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Butter a 9-inch-square 
baking dish, and set aside. 
2. Whisk together the cream, 1 teaspoon salt, 1/4 teaspoon 
pepper, and the nutmeg in a small bowl, and 
set aside. Toss the potatoes, 1 teaspoon salt, and 1/4 
teaspoon pepper in a large bowl. 
3. Arrange one-third of the potatoes in the buttered 
dish, overlapping the slices. Sprinkle with one-third 
of the cheese. Repeat two more times with the remaining 
potatoes and cheese (end with a cheese 
layer). Pour the reserved cream mixture over the 
top layer. Gently shake the dish back and forth to 
distribute evenly. 
4. Cover with foil; bake 30 minutes. Remove the foil; 
bake until bubbling and well browned, about 30 
minutes more. Let cool slightly before serving. 
roasted yam halves 

SERVES 4 

Halving the yams before roasting greatly reduces 
the cooking time and allows them to develop a 
nice golden crust. 

2 yams or sweet potatoes (about 2 pounds) 
2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 


1 tablespoon finely chopped fresh thyme 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


Preheat the oven to 400 degrees  F. Halve the yams, and 
place, cut side up, in a shallow baking dish just large 
enough to hold them in a single layer. Drizzle with 
the oil, and sprinkle with the thyme. Season with 
salt and pepper. Bake until golden brown and very 
tender, 35 to 45 minutes. 









southwestern sweet 
potato gratin 

SERVES 8 TO 10 

Chihuahua, Cotija, and Mexican crema give the 
dish authentic flavor, but Monterey Jack, French 
feta, and sour cream are good substitutes. 

Unsalted butter, for baking dish 

4 large sweet potatoes (about 4 pounds), 
peeled and thinly sliced into rounds 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

11/2 cups grated Chihuahua or Monterey Jack 
cheese (6 ounces) 

11/2 cups Cotija or French feta cheese, 
crumbled (6 ounces) 

1 small onion, thinly sliced 

1 teaspoon finely chopped canned chipotle 
chile in adobo (optional) 

1/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons homemade 
or low-sodium store-bought chicken stock, 
or water 


1/4 cup finely chopped fresh cilantro leaves 
1 cup crushed tortilla chips 


Lime wedges, for garnish 

Mexican crema or sour cream, for garnish 
(optional) 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Butter a 9 x 1  
baking dish; set aside. Toss the potatoes with 11/2 
teaspoons salt and 1/4 teaspoon pepper. Arrange half 
of the potatoes in the buttered dish, overlapping 
the slices. Sprinkle with half of each cheese. Top 
with onion. 
2. Stir the chipotle (if desired) into the stock; drizzle 
over the onion. Sprinkle with half the cilantro. 
Top with the remaining potatoes; sprinkle with the 
remaining cheeses and cilantro. Scatter the chips 
on top. 
3. Cover with foil; bake 30 minutes. Remove the foil; 
bake until very tender and top is well browned, 
about 30 minutes more. Let cool slightly before 
serving. Serve with limes, and with crema, if desired. 
SIDE DISHES 385 


skillet sweet potatoes 
with wild mushrooms 

SERVES 8 TO 10 

1 ounce dried wild mushrooms, such as 
porcini (about 1 cup) 


1 cup boiling water 
2 tablespoons brandy 


6 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted 
Olive oil, for the skillet 


6 sweet potatoes (about 5 pounds), peeled 
and cut into  -thick rounds 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1. Place the dried mushrooms in a small bowl; cover 
with boiling water. Let soak, stirring occasionally, 
until soft, about 30 minutes. Remove the mushrooms; 
reserve 1/3 cup soaking liquid. Using paper 
towels, squeeze out excess water from the mushrooms; 
roughly chop, and set aside. 
2. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F, with the rack in the 
center. In a small bowl, whisk the brandy, 5 tablespoons 
butter, and reserved mushroom liquid. Rub 
a 9-inch seasoned cast-iron skillet with oil. Arrange 
one-quarter of the potatoes in a single layer on the 
bottom, overlapping slightly. Scatter one-third of 
the mushrooms over the potatoes, then drizzle with 
one-quarter of the brandy mixture. Season with salt 
and pepper. Repeat the layering two more times; 
top with the remaining potatoes and liquid; season 
with salt. 
3. Cover the skillet tightly with foil. Bake until the 
potatoes are just fork-tender, about 35 minutes. Remove 
the foil, and brush the top with the remaining 
tablespoon butter. Continue baking until the 
potatoes are golden brown and tender, 25 to 30 minutes 
more. Let stand 10 minutes before serving. 
lemon and caper 
mashed potatoes 

SERVES 4 

To keep mashed potatoes warm for up to 2 hours, 
place them in a heatproof bowl over a pot filled 
with 3 inches of barely simmering water; cover to 
seal in the steam. 

2 pounds Yukon Gold potatoes, peeled 
and quartered 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

6 tablespoons unsalted butter 

3/4 cup milk 
2 teaspoons fresh lemon juice, plus 
2 teaspoons finely grated lemon zest 


3 tablespoons capers, drained and 
coarsely chopped 


1/4 cup coarsely chopped fresh flat- 
leaf parsley 


1. Place the potatoes in a large saucepan, and fill 
with enough water to cover the potatoes by 1 inch. 
Bring to a boil over high heat. Add a generous 
amount of salt; reduce heat to a simmer. Cook until 
the potatoes are tender when pierced with a paring 
knife, about 15 minutes. Drain; using a potato 
masher or potato ricer, mash the potatoes. 
2. Meanwhile, in a medium saucepan over medium 
heat, combine 5 tablespoons butter and the milk, 
lemon juice, zest, and capers. Heat until the butter 
is melted and the mixture is warm to the touch. 
3. Fold the milk mixture and the parsley into the 
mashed potatoes, and season with salt and pepper. 
Dot with the remaining tablespoon butter just before 
serving. 
386 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


roasted baby potatoes 
with romesco sauce 

SERVES 4 

Romesco sauce, from the Catalonian region of 
Spain, is traditionally served with shellfish. We 
serve our version with roasted potatoes. It's even 
better the next day, when the flavors have had a 
chance to blend: Refrigerate it overnight in a covered 
container, and bring to room temperature 
before serving. 

3 ounces whole blanched almonds 

2 red bell peppers 
1 small garlic clove 


1 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/8 teaspoon smoked hot paprika 


1/4 cup loosely packed mint leaves 
1 teaspoon sherry vinegar or 
red wine vinegar 
11/2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

1 pound small red and yellow potatoes 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Spread the almonds 
in a single layer on a rimmed baking sheet; toast in 
the oven until lightly golden and fragrant, 7 to 8 
minutes. Remove from the oven; cool 15 minutes. 
2. Meanwhile, roast the red peppers over a gas 
burner until blistered and charred, turning as each 
section blackens. (Alternatively, roast the peppers 
on a baking sheet under the broiler.) Transfer to a 
large bowl, and cover tightly with plastic wrap; let 
steam about 15 minutes. Using paper towels, peel 
off the blackened skins; remove and discard the 
stems and seeds. 
3. Raise the oven temperature to 375 degrees F. In a food 
processor, combine the almonds, garlic, roasted red 
peppers, 3/4 teaspoon salt, paprika, mint, and vinegar. 
Process to a coarse paste, about 1 minute. With 
the machine running, add 1 tablespoon oil in a slow, 
steady stream until the sauce is smooth. Transfer 
the sauce to a small bowl, and set aside. 
4. Place the potatoes on a rimmed baking sheet, 
and toss with the remaining 1/2 tablespoon oil and 
1/4 teaspoon salt. Roast in the oven until the skins 
are slightly crisp and the potatoes are tender, shaking 
the pan once to turn the potatoes, 20 to 30 minutes. 
Serve hot, with the sauce on the side. 






colcannon 

SERVES 4 

This traditional Irish potato dish can be assembled 
up to 2 hours ahead and then browned just 
before serving. 

11/2 pounds russet potatoes 

1 savoy cabbage, trimmed, pale-green 
leaves finely shredded (4 cups) 


1 leek, pale-green and white parts only, 
cut into   dice 


1 cup milk 
4 tablespoons unsalted butter 


1/4 teaspoon freshly grated nutmeg 
Coarse salt 


1. Preheat the broiler. Peel and quarter the potatoes, 
and place in a medium saucepan; add enough cold 
water to cover. Bring to a boil over high heat; reduce 
heat to a simmer, and cook until tender when 
pierced with a fork, about 15 minutes. Drain the potatoes 
and return them to the saucepan. Mash them 
with a potato masher, or pass them through a ricer; 
cover the pan to keep warm. 
2. Meanwhile, in another saucepan, combine the 
cabbage, leek, milk, 2 tablespoons butter, and nutmeg; 
season with salt. Cover, and cook over medium 
heat, stirring occasionally, until the cabbage and 
leek are soft but not browned, about 15 minutes. Stir 
into the potatoes. 
3. Spread the mixture in an 8-inch-square baking 
dish. Make a small well in the center, and place 
under the broiler until lightly browned on top, about 
5 minutes. 
4. Remove from the broiler. Place the remaining 2 
tablespoons butter in the well. Serve immediately, 
spooning melted butter from the well onto each 
serving, if desired. 
SIDE DISHES 387 








rosti potatoes 

SERVES 6 

31/2 pounds (about 10) Yukon Gold potatoes, 
peeled and placed in cold water 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1/4 cup clarified butter 

1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Shred the potatoes on 
the large holes of a box grater. Wrap the potatoes 
in a clean kitchen towel; squeeze out the liquid. Place 
in a medium bowl; toss with salt and pepper. 
2. Heat half the butter in a 9- or 10-inch ovenproof 
nonstick saute pan over medium-low heat. Spread 
the potatoes in the pan evenly; press down with a 
spatula to flatten the cake. Cook until the bottom 
is golden and turning crisp, about 18 minutes. 
3. Remove the pan from the heat. Invert the cake 
onto a plate; slide back into the pan. Return to heat, 
and spoon the remaining butter around the edges 
of the pan. Cook until the other side begins to get 
crisp, about 10 minutes, shaking the pan several 
times to loosen the cake. 
4. Transfer to the oven until cooked through and 
tender in the center, about 12 minutes. Cut into 
wedges, and serve. 
gratin dauphinoise 

SERVES 4 TO 6 

2 tablespoons unsalted butter, 
room temperature, plus more for 
the baking dish 


3 pounds (8 to 10 small) Yukon Gold 
potatoes 


1 large garlic clove, minced 
11/4 cups milk 

1 cup heavy cream 
11/2 teaspoons coarse salt 

1/4 teaspoon freshly grated nutmeg 
1 dried bay leaf 


Freshly ground pepper 

3 ounces Gruyere cheese, finely grated 
(about 1 cup) 


1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F, with the rack in the 
center. Generously butter a 9 x 1  glass baking 
dish. Peel the potatoes, and slice into  thick 
rounds. Place the slices in a bowl of cold water 
as you go to prevent discoloration. 
2. In a medium saucepan, combine the garlic, milk, 
heavy cream, salt, nutmeg, and bay leaf. Bring just 
to a simmer over medium heat, and pour into the 
prepared baking dish. Discard the bay leaf. 
3. Drain the potatoes in a colander, and transfer to 
the baking dish. Using a large spoon, toss the potatoes 
with the milk mixture, pressing down gently 
to distribute the potato slices evenly. Season with 
pepper. Dot with butter, distributing evenly over 
the entire surface; sprinkle with the cheese. 
4. Place in the oven; bake until the potatoes can 
be pierced with a fork and the top is brown, 45 to 
50 minutes. Serve immediately. 
388 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


parsleyed potatoes 

SERVES 4 

2 pounds small red potatoes, such as red 
creamer or Red Bliss 


2 teaspoons coarse salt 
2 tablespoons unsalted butter 


2 tablespoons roughly chopped fresh flat- 
leaf parsley 


Freshly ground pepper 

1. Using a vegetable peeler or paring knife, peel the 
middle of each potato, if desired. 
2. Place the potatoes and salt in a large saucepan, 
and cover with cold water. Bring to a boil over high 
heat; reduce heat to medium-low. Cook until a fork 
inserted into the center of the potatoes meets only 
slight resistance, about 20 minutes. 
3. Drain the potatoes in a colander; return to the 
warm saucepan. Toss with the butter and parsley, 
and season with pepper. Transfer to a serving dish; 
serve immediately. 
grilled herbed potatoes 
and shallots 

SERVES 6 

When put directly on the grill, potatoes will burn 
before they are cooked through. Parboiling potatoes 
and wrapping them in a foil packet with seasonings 
allows for perfectly grilled potatoes with 
lots of golden, flavorful bits. See page 619 for 
more spice-mix suggestions. 

21/2 pounds small new potatoes 

Coarse salt 

4 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

8 shallots, halved 

12 sprigs oregano 

Freshly ground pepper 

1. Place the potatoes in a large saucepan, and fill 
with enough cold water to cover them by 2 inches. 
Bring to a boil over high heat, and add salt. Reduce 
heat; simmer until the potatoes are slightly tender 
when pierced with a fork (but not cooked through), 
about 10 minutes. Drain; let stand until cool enough 
to handle. Cut each potato in half. 
2. Heat a grill to high. Overlap 2 pieces of foil, each 
about 3 feet long, to form a cross. Place the potatoes 
in one layer in the center of the cross. Drizzle 
the potatoes with 2 tablespoons oil; add the shallots 
and oregano; season with salt and pepper. Fold 
the foil, enclosing the potatoes, and seal the edges 
by crimping. 
3. Place the foil packet on the grill, and cook, shaking 
the packet occasionally with tongs, until the potatoes 
are cooked through and golden brown, about 
20 minutes, depending on the heat of the grill. Remove 
the packet from the grill, carefully, watching 
for any steam and hot oil that might escape. Transfer 
the potatoes to a serving bowl. Drizzle with the 
remaining 2 tablespoons oil, and adjust the seasoning 
as desired. 
SIDE DISHES 389 


pink potato salad 

SERVES 6 

Use small red or white potatoes if fingerling potatoes 
are unavailable. 

2 cups plain nonfat yogurt 

11/2 pounds fingerling potatoes 

1 seedless cucumber, cut into  thick 
half-moons 


4 ounces (about 1 cup) kalamata olives, 
pitted and cut in half 


1 small red onion, sliced into thin 
half-moons 


1/4 cup picked fresh chervil leaves 
3 tablespoons red-wine vinegar 


1/2 teaspoon ground cinnamon 
1/2 teaspoon ground nutmeg 


1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/4 teaspoon paprika 


1. Drain the yogurt in a cheesecloth-lined sieve for 
30 minutes. Place the potatoes in a medium pot, 
and cover with cold water; bring to a boil over high 
heat. Boil until tender, about 20 minutes. Remove 
from heat. Drain; run under cold water to stop the 
cooking. Set aside until completely cool. 
2. Cut the potatoes into   pieces; place in a 
bowl. Add the cucumber, olives, onion, and chervil; 
set aside. 
3. Place the drained yogurt (about 11/2 cups) in a 
bowl. Add the red-wine vinegar, cinnamon, nutmeg, 
salt, and paprika; stir until well combined. Pour over 
the potato mixture; stir until the potatoes are well 
coated. Transfer to a serving bowl. 
sauteed potatoes 

SERVES 4 

For crisp browned potatoes, avoid crowding the 
pan when sauteeing. 

11/2 pounds (about 4) russet potatoes 

2 tablespoons olive oil 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


1 tablespoon unsalted butter 
2 tablespoons chopped fresh chives 


1. Peel the potatoes, and place them in cold water 
to inhibit discoloration. Remove, and cut into 
  cubes. 
2. Heat half the oil in a large saute pan over medium 
heat. Pat the potatoes dry; add half to the pan. Season 
with salt and pepper. Cook, tossing frequently, 
until the potatoes are golden, 12 to 15 minutes. Add 
half the butter; as it melts, toss to coat the potatoes. 
3. Transfer to a serving plate; keep in a warm place 
while you repeat with the remaining oil, potatoes, 
and butter. When ready to serve, toss the potatoes 
with the chives. 
mashed potatoes 
and celery root 

SERVES 12 TO 14 

If you prefer a completely smooth texture, you 
may pass the potatoes and celery root through a 
food mill or ricer after they have been cooked. 

4 pounds Yukon Gold potatoes 
1 pound celery root 


1 cup heavy cream 
6 tablespoons unsalted butter 


1 tablespoon coarse salt 
1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 


1. Peel the potatoes, and cut into   pieces. Peel 
the celery root using a paring knife, following the 
shape of the root. Cut into   pieces. Place the 
potatoes and celery root in a small stockpot with 
enough water to cover, and bring to a boil over high 
heat. Reduce to a simmer, and cook until tender, 
about 10 minutes. Drain, return to the pot; place 
over low heat to dry out. 
390 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


2. Combine the cream, butter, salt, and pepper in a 
small saucepan, and place over medium heat until 
the butter is melted and the mixture comes to a simmer. 
Pour over the potato mixture, and combine, 
using a potato masher, until fluffy and smooth. 
florence's potato salad 

SERVES 8 

If making this in advance, wait to add the cucumber 
until just before serving. 

2 pounds russet potatoes, scrubbed 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


3 hard-boiled large eggs, peeled and cut 
into   dice 


1 stalk celery, finely chopped 

1 red onion, finely chopped 
1 cucumber, peeled, seeded
1/4 cup coarsely chopped flat-leaf parsley 


3 tablespoons cider vinegar 
6 tablespoon mayonnaise 


1. Place the potatoes in a medium saucepan; cover 
with water. Bring to a boil over high heat; add salt. 
Reduce heat to medium; simmer until tender, about 
20 minutes. Drain in a colander. When cool enough 
to handle, peel and cut into   pieces. Transfer 
to a medium bowl. Add the eggs, celery, onion, 
cucumber, and parsley. 
2. In a small bowl, whisk the vinegar and mayonnaise; 
season with salt and pepper. Pour the dressing 
over the vegetables; stir gently to combine. 
Adjust the seasoning with salt and pepper. Serve at 
room temperature. 
baked sweet potatoes 
with caramelized onions and 
shaved parmesan 


SERVES 6 

6 medium sweet potatoes (8 ounces each) 

1 tablespoon unsalted butter 

4 large yellow onions, cut in half, then into 
 -thick half-moons 


3 tablespoons sugar 

1 teaspoon coarse salt 

1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 

2 tablespoons balsamic vinegar 

11/2 ounces freshly shaved Parmesan cheese 
(about 1/2 cup) 

1. Preheat the oven to 450 degrees F. Place the potatoes on 
a baking sheet; bake until tender, about 45 minutes. 
Meanwhile, melt the butter in a large nonstick skillet 
over medium-low heat. Add the onions; cook 
until soft, about 15 minutes. Sprinkle with the sugar, 
salt, and pepper; toss to coat. Continue to cook, stirring 
occasionally, until the onions are very soft and 
caramelized, about 1 hour more, adding water 1 tablespoon 
at a time if the pan dries. Stir in the vinegar. 
Set aside; keep warm. 
2. When the potatoes are tender, split them open, 
and top with the caramelized onions and shaved 
Parmesan. Serve warm. 
SIDE DISHES 391 


fruit desserts 



crepes suzette 

MAKES ABOUT 14; SERVES ABOUT 6 

Beer, traditionally found in this dish, ferments the 
batter and adds flavor. 

for the batter 

2 cups milk 
1 teaspoon sugar 


5 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted 
3 large eggs 


1 tablespoon vegetable oil 
13/4 cups all-purpose flour 

1/2 teaspoon salt 
1/2 cup beer (not dark) 


for the filling 

11/2 sticks (12 tablespoons) unsalted butter, 
softened 

3 tablespoons sugar 

4 teaspoons Grand Marnier or other 
orange-flavored liqueur 


Finely grated zest of 1 orange 

for the sauce 

2 cups orange juice 

1/4 cup sugar 
1 tablespoon cornstarch 


3 tablespoons Grand Marnier or other 
orange-flavored liqueur 


2 tablespoons cold unsalted butter, cut into 
small pieces 

for the garnish 

2 oranges, peel and pith removed, flesh cut 
into segments 


Confectioners' sugar, for dusting 

1. Make the batter: Whisk together the milk, sugar, 
butter, eggs, and oil. Sift together the flour and salt. 
Whisk the milk mixture into the flour mixture. Pour 
the batter through a fine sieve into a large bowl. 
Whisk in the beer. Refrigerate, covered, 6 hours 
(or overnight). 
2. Let the batter stand at room temperature 15 minutes. 
Heat a crepe pan or a 1  nonstick skillet 
over medium heat. Pour 1/4 cup batter into the pan, 
swirling to cover the bottom. Cook, flipping once, 
until golden, about 2 minutes per side. Repeat. 

3. Make the filling: Stir together the butter, sugar, 
liqueur, and zest. Spread 2 teaspoons over 1 crepe. 
Roll up; place on a baking sheet, seam side down. 
Repeat until all the crepes have been rolled. 
4. Make the sauce: Bring the juice and sugar to a 
simmer in a saucepan over medium heat; skim the 
foam. Whisk together the cornstarch and 1 tablespoon 
water; add to the pan. Whisk in the liqueur. 
Cook until thickened, about 5 minutes. Remove 
from heat; whisk in the butter, 1 piece at a time. 
5. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Cover the crepes with 
foil; heat in the oven 10 minutes. Transfer to plates. 
Top with sauce and oranges. Dust with confectioners' 
sugar. 
blood-orange pavlovas 
with grand marnier 

MAKES 12 

6 blood oranges, peel and pith removed 
7 tablespoons Grand Marnier or other 
orange-flavored liqueur 
4 large eggs, separated 


11/4 cups sugar 
1/8 teaspoon salt

1 teaspoon distilled white vinegar 
1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 


1/4 cup orange juice 
1/2 cup heavy cream 


1. Preheat the oven to 225 degrees F. Cut the oranges into 
segments. Toss with 3 tablespoons liqueur; refrigerate 
until ready to use. 
2. Make the meringue: Put the egg whites, 1 cup 
sugar, and a pinch of salt in the heatproof bowl of 
an electric mixer. Set over a pan of simmering 
water; whisk constantly until the sugar is melted 
and the mixture is hot. 
3. Using the whisk attachment, beat the egg white 
mixture on medium speed until soft peaks form. 
Raise speed to high; beat until cool, and stiff, glossy 
peaks form. Beat in the vinegar and vanilla. 
394 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


4. Using a rubber spatula, mound the meringue into 
12  -wide rounds on parchment-paper-lined 
baking sheets. Swirl the edges and make a well in 
the center of each meringue. Bake until crisp and 
just set in the center, 40 to 50 minutes. Let cool on 
the sheet on a wire rack. When the meringues are 
cool enough to handle, peel off the parchment. Let 
cool completely. 
5. Make the custard: Stir together the yolks, orange 
juice, remaining 1/4 cup each sugar and liqueur, and 
1/8 teaspoon salt in a large heatproof bowl set over 
a pan of simmering water; whisk until thickened 
and a spoon leaves a wake, about 4 minutes. Pass 
the mixture through a fine sieve into a bowl. Refrigerate 
until cold, about 1 hour. 
6. Beat the cream to soft peaks; fold into the custard. 
Refrigerate until ready to serve, up to 4 hours 
(rewhisk before using). 
7. Just before serving, mound custard in each 
meringue. Top the custard mounds with orange 
segments and their juices. 
baked pears with 
vanilla mascarpone 

SERVES 4 

Bosc pears must be very ripe; Anjou, which are 
juicier, can be slightly firm. Avoid enamel baking 
dishes, as they cause the syrup to burn. 

4 Anjou or Bosc pears 

1 tablespoon unsalted butter, softened 
2 tablespoons sugar 


1 cup red wine 
4 sprigs thyme (optional) 


Vanilla Mascarpone (recipe follows) 
Store-bought biscotti 

1. Preheat the oven to 425 degrees F. Slice off the bottom of 
each pear just enough so it will stand upright. Using 
a melon baller or small spoon, remove the seeds 
from the bottom. Peel the upper half, leaving the 
stem intact; pat dry with a paper towel. Rub butter 
over the peeled part of each pear; stand the pears 
in a small baking dish (about 7 x 11 inches). Sprinkle 
with the sugar. 
2. Pour the wine into the baking dish; add the thyme 
sprigs, if using. Bake until the pears are soft when 
pierced with a paring knife and well browned, about 
45 minutes; using a small spoon, baste the pears 
occasionally with the wine, adding a bit of water 
as needed to prevent the liquid from evaporating. 
Remove from the oven. 
3. Spoon some of the pan juices into each serving 
dish, and place a pear on top. Serve with a dollop 
of mascarpone and several biscotti on the side. 
vanilla mascarpone 

MAKES ABOUT 1 CUP 

For the creamiest results, allow the mascarpone 
to stand at room temperature for 15 minutes before 
serving. 

1/2 vanilla bean, split and scraped 
8 ounces mascarpone cheese 


2 tablespoons confectioners' sugar 

Combine all the ingredients in a small bowl, and 
stir together with a wooden spoon. 

watermelon and 
raspberry salad 

SERVES 4 

Easy to prepare, this vibrant pink fruit salad can 
be served on its own or spooned over a scoop of 
vanilla ice cream or your favorite sorbet. 

1 41/2-pound piece watermelon, 
peeled, seeded, and cut into   
cubes (about 4 cups) 


1 pint fresh raspberries 
Juice of 1 lemon 


1/4 cup sugar 
Vanilla ice cream, for serving (optional) 


Place the watermelon in a large bowl, and add the 
raspberries, lemon juice, and sugar; toss to combine. 
Let stand at least 30 minutes, tossing occasionally, 
until all the sugar is dissolved. Serve 
chilled or at room temperature with vanilla ice 
cream, if desired. 

FRUIT DESSERTS 395 


pear pavlova 

SERVES 6 

for the pears 

1 750-ml bottle dry red wine, such as 
Cabernet or Zinfandel 


3 cups water 
1 cup sugar 


1 teaspoon whole black peppercorns 
3 dried bay leaves 


2 cinnamon sticks 
3 to 6 ripe Bosc pears 


for the meringue base 

4 large egg whites 

Pinch of salt 

3/4 cup packed light-brown sugar 
1/4 cup superfine sugar 
1 teaspoon distilled white vinegar 


1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 

for the topping 

1 cup heavy cream 
2 tablespoons superfine sugar 


1. Poach the pears: Combine the wine, water, sugar, 
peppercorns, bay leaves, and cinnamon sticks in a 
large saucepan. Bring to a boil, and stir until the 
sugar has dissolved. Reduce the heat to a gentle 
simmer. 
2. Carefully peel the pears, leaving the stems intact. 
Place in the pan; cover, and cook, rotating occasionally, 
until the bases of the pears are easily 
pierced with a paring knife, 20 to 25 minutes, depending 
on the ripeness of the fruit. Meanwhile, 
prepare an ice-water bath. 
3. Using a large slotted spoon, carefully transfer the 
pears to a large metal bowl set in the ice bath. Pour 
the poaching liquid through a fine sieve into the 
bowl with the pears; let cool completely. Cover with 
plastic wrap; refrigerate overnight to let the pears 
absorb the poaching liquid. 
4. Preheat the oven to 300 degrees F, with the rack in the 
center. Line a baking sheet with parchment paper. 
Using an overturned bowl or cake pan as a guide, 
trace an 8-inch circle on the parchment; turn the 
parchment over, marked side down. 
5. Make the meringue base: Place the egg whites, 
salt, and light brown sugar in the bowl of an electric 
mixer fitted with the whisk attachment. Beat on 
low speed until well combined and no lumps of 
sugar remain. Increase speed to medium; beat until 
soft peaks form, about 9 minutes. With the mixer 
running, gradually add the superfine sugar. Continue 
beating until the peaks are stiff and glossy, 
about 2 minutes. Beat in the vinegar and vanilla. 
6. Using a rubber spatula, spread the meringue into 
the marked 8-inch circle on the baking sheet; form 
peaks around the edge and a well in the center. 
7. Bake the meringue until crisp around the edge 
and just set in the center, about 11/4 hours. Transfer 
the baking sheet to a wire rack until the meringue 
is cool enough to handle. Carefully peel off the 
parchment; cool meringue completely on the rack. 
8. Make the topping: In a small bowl, whip the 
heavy cream and sugar until stiff peaks form. Cover 
with plastic wrap; refrigerate until ready to use. 
9. Slice the pears in half lengthwise; remove the 
seeds and stems with a spoon or melon baller, and 
discard. Cut the pears into   pieces, and place 
in a bowl; cover with plastic wrap, and set aside. 
10. Bring 3 cups poaching liquid to a boil in a 
medium saucepan; reduce heat, and simmer until 
syrupy and reduced to about 1 cup, 20 to 25 minutes. 
Meanwhile, prepare another ice-water bath. 
Pour the syrup into a clean bowl set in the ice bath; 
stir frequently until cool and thickened. 
11. To assemble, carefully place the meringue on a 
serving platter. Spoon the whipped cream on top, 
and then add the pears. Serve, sliced into wedges 
and drizzled with syrup. 
396 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


LEFTOVER EGG YOLKS 

When recipes such as meringues call for egg 
whites only, don't toss out the yolks. Instead, 
keep them for recipes that need only the thick 
and fatty yolk to make them complete. Egg 
yolks are the key ingredient for fruit curds 
and custard, for example; yolks serve as 
thickening and binding agents in both of 
these creamy dishes. Or use the yolks to 
make spaghetti carbonara, or a rich hollandaise 
sauce to serve with eggs Benedict or 
over fish and vegetables. You could also combine 
the yolks with vegetable oil, lemon juice 
or vinegar, and seasonings for a simple 
homemade mayonnaise. Unlike commercial 
mayonnaise, this kind lasts only 3 to 4 days 
when refrigerated in an airtight container, so 
plan to use it within that time. 

If you don't want to use the yolks right away, 
they can be saved for later. Yolks can be 
stored in an airtight container and refrigerated 
for up to 3 days or frozen for up to 4 
months. When refrigerating, cover the yolks 
with a little water to keep them from drying 
out, and remember to drain the water before 
use. To prevent them from becoming gelatinous 
when frozen, add either 1/8 teaspoon salt 
or 11/2 teaspoons sugar (use salt if you plan to 
use the yolks in savory dishes and sugar for 
making desserts) to each 1/4 cup yolks (about 
4). Beat the yolks lightly before mixing in the 
salt or sugar. Label the container with the 
date and number of yolks. You will need 
1 tablespoon thawed yolk for each large yolk 
called for in a recipe. 

fresh raspberry gelatin 
and whipped cream 

SERVES 4 

3/4 cup sugar 
3/4 cup water 
1/2 bunch fresh mint, leaves removed 
from stems, rinsed well (about 1/2 cup) 


1/2 cup white grape juice 
1 tablespoon fresh lime juice 


11/2 teaspoons unflavored gelatin 
(1/2 envelope) 

1 6-ounce container fresh 
raspberries, rinsed 


1/2 cup heavy cream 

1 tablespoon confectioners' sugar 

1. Place a medium saucepan over high heat. Add 
the sugar, water, and mint, and bring to a boil. Reduce 
heat to medium; simmer 2 minutes, swirling 
the pan to dissolve the sugar. Strain the mixture 
through a fine-mesh sieve into a small bowl; discard 
the mint. 
2. Combine the grape juice, lime juice, and gelatin 
in a medium heatproof bowl set over a pan of simmering 
water, and stir until the gelatin is dissolved. 
Remove the bowl from the heat; add the mint syrup 
and berries, stirring with a wooden spoon to break 
some berries into pieces. Divide the mixture among 
4 6-ounce ramekins. Cover with plastic; refrigerate 
until firm, at least 4 hours and up to 2 days. 
3. Just before serving, place the heavy cream in the 
bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the whisk attachment; 
beat on medium speed until soft peaks 
form, 3 to 4 minutes. Add the confectioners' sugar, 
and continue beating until soft peaks return, 1 to 2 
minutes. To serve, spoon a dollop of whipped cream 
onto each serving. 
FRUIT DESSERTS 397 


thyme-roasted figs 
over brioche pain perdu 


SERVES 6 

12 ripe figs (about 12 ounces) 

2 to 3 tablespoons thyme-flower honey 
4 sprigs thyme, plus more for garnish 


1/4 cup water, plus more as needed 
6 large eggs 


3/4 cup heavy cream 
1 teaspoon ground cinnamon 
6 slices (3/4 inch) day-old brioche 
11/2 tablespoons unsalted butter 

1/2 cup creme fraiche 
2 tablespoons thyme flowers, for garnish 


1. Preheat the oven to 300 degrees  F. Combine the figs, 
honey, thyme, and water in a small ovenproof skillet. 
Bring to a simmer over medium-high heat. 
Transfer to the oven; cook until the figs have softened, 
about 40 minutes, basting occasionally with 
the cooking liquid. Remove the pan from the heat, 
and set aside. 
2. Combine the eggs, cream, and cinnamon in a 
medium bowl; whisk to combine. Dip the brioche 
in the egg mixture, and set aside. Heat the butter 
in a large nonstick skillet over medium heat. Cook 
the brioche until golden, about 1 minute on each 
side. Transfer to a serving platter. Spoon the roasted 
figs and cooking liquid over the brioche. Top with 
creme fraiche, and garnish with fresh thyme sprigs 
and flowers. 
melon and berries 
steeped in red wine, sauternes, 
basil, and mint 


SERVES 4 

The steeping liquid needs to chill for at least 4 
hours, so plan accordingly. 

1 tablespoon roughly chopped basil 
(about 6 large leaves) 


11/2 tablespoons coarsely chopped fresh 
mint (about 12 large leaves), plus whole 
sprigs for garnish 

1 cup Sauternes or other dessert wine 

1/2 cup Cabernet Sauvignon or other 
red wine 


4 tablespoons sugar 

1 vanilla bean, split lengthwise 

1/2 Charentais or other melon such 
as cantaloupe, honeydew, or Crenshaw, 
scooped into 12 balls 


8 ounces strawberries, stems removed 
and quartered 


1/4 cup blackberries 

6 ounces raspberries (1/2-pint container) 

1/2 cup chilled rose champagne 
Fresh currants, for garnish (optional) 


1. Prepare an ice-water bath; set aside. Tie the basil 
and mint in a small square of cheesecloth. In a small 
saucepan, combine the Sauternes, red wine, sugar, 
vanilla bean, and mint-basil bundle. Bring the mixture 
to a boil, stirring to dissolve the sugar. Remove 
from heat; transfer to the ice bath. Chill until lukewarm. 
Add the melon, strawberries, and blackberries; 
transfer to a large bowl. Cover; place in the 
refrigerator for 4 to 6 hours. 
2. To serve, remove the vanilla bean. Stir in the raspberries. 
Transfer the mixture to 4 bowls. Drizzle 
about 2 tablespoons champagne over each, and garnish 
with currants, if desired, and mint. 
398 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


lemon and cherry trifle 

MAKES 6 INDIVIDUAL TRIFLES 

2 cups heavy cream 

2 recipes Lemon Curd (page 656) 
Poached Cherries (recipe follows) 


30 vanilla wafers 
Candied Lemon Zest (recipe follows) 

6 fresh cherries, for garnish 

In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the whisk 
attachment, beat the cream until soft peaks form. 
Layer the lemon curd, cherries, wafers, zest, and 
whipped cream in tall glasses. Cover with plastic 
wrap; chill in the refrigerator up to 2 hours. Serve; 
garnish each with a fresh cherry. 

poached cherries 

MAKES ENOUGH FOR 6 SMALL TRIFLES 

2 pounds red or yellow fresh cherries, 
pitted (5 to 6 cups) 


1/2 cup sugar 
1 tablespoon kirsch (optional) 


2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 

1. Bring all the ingredients to a simmer in a medium 
saucepan over medium-low heat; cook, stirring occasionally, 
until the cherries are tender, about 15 
minutes. Transfer the cherries to a large bowl. 
2. Continue cooking the remaining mixture in the 
pan over medium heat until it is slightly thickened, 
about 3 minutes. Pour over the cherries; let cool. 
Store in an airtight container in the refrigerator for 
up to 1 day. 
candied lemon zest 

MAKES ABOUT 1/2 CUP 

3 lemons 

1 cup sugar 

1/2 cup water 

Zest the lemons with a vegetable peeler into long 
strips. Remove the pith; cut the strips into fine julienne. 
Bring the sugar and water to a boil in a small 
saucepan, stirring to dissolve the sugar. Add the 
zest; boil 5 minutes. Cover, and remove from heat; 
let cool. Strain off the syrup before using. The zest 
can be stored in an airtight container in the refrigerator 
up to 2 weeks. 

baked apricots 
with almond topping 


SERVES 4 

41/2 teaspoons unsalted butter, 
softened, plus more for the dish 

1/4 cup whole almonds, skin on 

3 tablespoons packed light-brown sugar 

6 apricots, peeled, halved, and pitted 

1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Butter a 9-inch-square 
baking dish. Process the almonds and brown sugar 
in a food processor until the almonds are finely 
chopped. Add the butter; process until just combined. 
2. Place the apricot halves, cut sides up, in the buttered 
baking dish. Cover the top of each apricot half 
with almond mixture. Bake until the apricots are 
soft and the almond mixture is deep golden brown, 
15 to 20 minutes. Transfer 3 apricot halves to each 
serving plate. Serve warm. 
FRUIT DESSERTS 399 


grilled peaches 
with chilled sabayon 


SERVES 4 

Sabayon is the French term for zabaglione, a 
frothy Italian concoction that can be served warm 
as a sauce or chilled as a creamy dessert on its 
own. We added a bit of peach-flavored liqueur to 
enhance the flavor of the fruit, but the sabayon is 
just as delicious without. 

5 large egg yolks 

1/3 cup plus 1 tablespoon sugar 

1/3 cup champagne or sparkling wine 

2 tablespoons peach liqueur (optional) 

3/4 cup heavy cream, chilled 
2 peaches, halved and pitted 

2 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted 

2 tablespoons light brown sugar 

1. Heat a grill or grill pan. Prepare an ice-water bath; 
set aside. Make the sabayon: Combine the yolks, 
sugar, champagne, and liqueur, if using, in a large 
metal bowl set over a large pan of simmering water. 
Whisk until the mixture is very thick and has expanded 
in volume, about 7 minutes. Place the bowl 
in the ice bath; let cool completely. 
2. Place the cream in a large bowl, and beat until 
stiff peaks form. Fold the whipped cream into the 
egg yolk mixture. Cover with plastic wrap, and place 
in the refrigerator at least 20 minutes. 
3. Line a grill or pan with heavy-duty foil. Brush the 
peaches with butter; sprinkle with brown sugar. 
Grill, cut side down, until the peaches are tender 
and the sugar is caramelized, 6 to 7 minutes. Divide 
the sabayon among 4 dishes, and top each with a 
peach half. Serve. 
pineapple floats 

MAKES 8 

In place of fresh pineapple, you can drain two 
8-ounce cans crushed pineapple, roast it, and skip 
making the syrup. 

1 pineapple (about 4 pounds), top trimmed 

1 cup granulated sugar 

1 vanilla bean, halved lengthwise 

3 tablespoons packed dark-brown sugar 

3 tablespoons dark rum 

1 quart best-quality vanilla ice cream 

1 liter club soda 

1. Preheat the oven to 425 degrees F. Peel the pineapple 
using a sharp knife, reserving the peels as you work. 
Cut the flesh lengthwise into quarters; cut out and 
reserve the core. Transfer the peels and core pieces 
to a large pot; reserve the flesh. 
2. Add 5 cups water to the pot; bring to a boil. Add 
the granulated sugar and vanilla bean; cook about 
30 minutes, mashing the peels occasionally with 
the back of a spoon to extract juice. Meanwhile, cut 
the pineapple into   cubes; transfer to a 
rimmed baking sheet. Sprinkle with the brown 
sugar and rum. Cook until just golden, about 20 
minutes. Transfer to a bowl; let cool completely. 
Cover; refrigerate up to 2 days. 
3. Pour the pineapple peel mixture from the pot 
through a sieve into a large bowl; discard the solids. 
Return the liquid to the pot, and bring to a boil. 
Cook until reduced to 1/2 cup, about 4 minutes. Refrigerate 
the syrup, covered, until ready to serve, up 
to 2 days. 
4. Divide the pineapple evenly among 8 serving 
glasses. Top with 2 teaspoons syrup and 2 scoops 
ice cream. Fill with club soda. Drizzle with remaining 
syrup. 
400 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


asian pears with star 
anise baked in parchment 

SERVES 4 

This recipe is versatile. You can use any firm-
flesh pears or apples-or a combination; just be 
sure the size of the fruits you use is uniform. You 
can also try another dry whole spice (such as cinnamon 
or cloves) in place of the star anise. 

1 lemon 

2 Asian pears 
4 whole star anise 


1/4 cup honey 

1/4 cup dry vermouth, dry white wine, 
cider, or water 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Cut 4 pieces of parchment 
paper to measure 12 inches square each. Juice 
the lemon into a small bowl. Halve each pear horizontally. 
Dip the cut sides of the pears in the lemon 
juice (to prevent browning). Using a melon baller, 
remove the core from each half. 
2. Place 1 star anise in the cored center of each pear 
half. Drizzle 1 tablespoon honey over each star anise. 
3. Place 1 pear half, cut side up, on each piece of 
paper. Working with one at a time, hold a pear half 
in paper in the palm of your hand; gather the edges 
of the paper around the fruit with your free hand. 
Transfer to a rimmed baking sheet. 
4. Pour 1 tablespoon vermouth into each pear half 
in parchment. Twist the paper tightly around the 
top of each fruit to seal. Bake 45 minutes; the pears 
should be tender. Transfer the packets to shallow 
bowls. Serve immediately, opening the packets at 
the table. 
plum-nectarine buckle 

SERVES 8 TO 10 

6 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted 

11/2 cups all-purpose flour 
1 cup plus 2 tablespoons sugar 

11/2 teaspoons baking powder 
1/8 teaspoon ground allspice 

Salt 
1 large egg 


2/3 cup whole milk 
1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 


3/4 pound plums, halved, pitted, and cut 
into  -thick wedges (2 cups) 
3/4 pound nectarines, halved, pitted, and 
cut into  -thick wedges (2 cups) 
1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice 
Crumble Topping (page 403) 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Brush a 9-inch-square 
cake pan or 10-inch cast-iron skillet with 2 tablespoons 
butter; set aside. Whisk together the flour, 
3/4 cup sugar, and the baking powder, allspice, and 
3/4 teaspoon salt in a medium bowl; set aside. 
2. Whisk together the egg, milk, vanilla, and remaining 
4 tablespoons butter in another medium 
bowl. Add the egg mixture to the flour mixture; stir 
to combine. Spread the batter evenly into the buttered 
pan. 
3. Toss the plums, nectarines, lemon juice, remaining 
1/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons sugar, and a pinch of 
salt in a large bowl. Spread the fruit mixture evenly 
over the batter. Sprinkle with the topping. Bake until 
a cake tester inserted into the center comes out with 
moist crumbs, about 1 hour and 15 minutes. Let cool 
in the pan on a wire rack 1 hour before serving. 
FRUIT DESSERTS 401 


sour cherry-pistachio crisp 

SERVES 8 

13/4 pounds pitted fresh or frozen sour 
cherries 

1/2 cup chopped unsalted pistachios 
1/2 cup plus 2 tablespoons all-purpose flour 


1/3 cup old-fashioned rolled oats 
1/4 teaspoon baking powder 


Salt 
6 tablespoons unsalted butter, softened 


3 tablespoons packed light-brown sugar 

3/4 cup granulated sugar 
2 teaspoons cornstarch 
Pinch of ground cinnamon 


1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. If using frozen cherries, 
spread them in a single layer on a rimmed baking 
sheet. Let stand at room temperature until 
cherries have thawed almost completely but still 
hold their shape, about 30 minutes. Drain off any 
accumulated liquid. 
2. Whisk together the pistachios, flour, oats, baking 
powder, and 1/4 teaspoon salt in a medium bowl; 
set aside. Put the butter, brown sugar, and 1/4 cup 
granulated sugar in the bowl of an electric mixer 
fitted with the paddle attachment; mix on medium 
speed until creamy. 
3. Stir the pistachio mixture into the butter mixture 
until just combined. Work the mixture through your 
fingers until it forms coarse crumbs ranging in size 
from small peas to gumballs; set the topping aside. 
4. Stir together the cherries, remaining 1/2 cup granulated 
sugar, the cornstarch, cinnamon, and a pinch 
of salt in a medium bowl. Transfer the cherry mixture 
to an 8-inch-square baking dish. Sprinkle the 
topping evenly over the cherry mixture. Bake until 
the topping turns golden and the juices are bubbling, 
50 minutes to 1 hour. Let cool on a wire rack 
1 hour before serving. 
PITTING CHERRIES 

To pit a cherry and keep the stem intact, 
reach for a clean paperclip. Unfold the clip 
at its center; depending on the size of the 
cherry, insert either the large or the small 
end of the paper clip through the bottom of 
the cherry. Loosen the pit and pull it out. 


apricot-almond cobbler 

SERVES 8 

1/2 cup whole raw almonds 


1 cup all-purpose flour 


1 cup plus 2 tablespoons sugar 
11/2 teaspoons baking powder 

Salt 


Pinch of freshly grated nutmeg 


6 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted 


1/2 cup whole milk, room temperature 


1 large egg, room temperature 

2 tablespoons almond-flavored liqueur, 
such as amaretto 


11/2 pounds apricots, halved lengthwise,
pitted, and cut into  -thick wedges 

1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Toast the almonds on 
a rimmed baking sheet in the oven, stirring occasionally, 
until fragrant and golden brown, about 
10 minutes. Let cool completely. Finely grind the 
almonds in a food processor; transfer to a medium 
bowl. Whisk in the flour, 3/4 cup sugar, the baking 
powder, 3/4 teaspoon salt, and the nutmeg; set aside. 
2. Brush a 10-inch cast-iron skillet with 2 tablespoons 
butter. Whisk together the remaining 4 tablespoons 
butter, milk, egg, and liqueur in a 
medium bowl. Stir the butter mixture into the flour 
mixture; spread evenly into the skillet. 
3. Stir the apricots, remaining 1/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons 
sugar, a pinch of salt, and the lemon juice 
in a medium bowl; spread evenly over the batter. 
Bake until a tester inserted into center comes out 
with moist crumbs, 50 to 60 minutes. Let cool in the 
skillet on a wire rack 1 hour before serving. 
402 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 








rhubarb-berry crumbles 

SERVES 6 

11/2 pounds rhubarb, cut crosswise into 
 -thick slices, leaves discarded 

2 cups raspberries or sliced strawberries, 
or a combination 


11/4 cups sugar 

2 tablespoons instant tapioca 

1/2 teaspoon finely grated orange zest, 
plus 2 tablespoons fresh orange juice 
Pinch of salt 


Crumble Topping (recipe follows) 
Vanilla yogurt, for serving (optional) 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees  F. Stir together the 
rhubarb, berries, sugar, tapioca, orange zest, orange 
juice, and salt in a bowl. Let stand 15 minutes, stirring 
occasionally. 
2. Divide the rhubarb mixture among 6 small ceramic 
baking dishes (1 cup capacity and 51/2 inches 
in diameter). Transfer the baking dishes to a 
rimmed baking sheet lined with parchment paper. 
Sprinkle with the topping, dividing evenly. 
3. Bake until the topping turns golden and the 
juices are bubbling, 30 to 35 minutes. Let cool on 
the sheet on a wire rack 30 minutes. Serve with yogurt, 
if desired. 






crumble topping 

MAKES ABOUT 13/4 CUPS 

6 tablespoons unsalted butter, softened 

1/4 cup packed light-brown sugar 

1/4 teaspoon finely grated orange zest (for 
Rhubarb-Berry Crumbles; optional) 


1 cup all-purpose flour 
Pinch of salt 


Put the butter, brown sugar, and orange zest, if desired, 
in the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the 
paddle attachment. Mix on medium speed until 
creamy. Stir in the flour and salt. Work the mixture 
through your fingers until it forms coarse crumbs 
ranging in size from peas to gumballs. 







mixed-berry grunt 

SERVES 8 

1 cup sugar 

1/4 teaspoon plus a pinch of ground 
cinnamon 


3/4 cup all-purpose flour 
3/4 teaspoon baking powder 
Salt 
1/4 teaspoon ground ginger 
1/3 cup whole milk, room temperature 


2 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted 
4 cups raspberries (about 11/2 pints) 


3 cups blackberries (about 11/2 pints) 

2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 

Heavy cream, for drizzling 

1. Stir together 2 tablespoons sugar and 1/4 teaspoon 
cinnamon in a small bowl; set aside. Whisk 
together the flour, 2 tablespoons sugar, the baking 
powder, a pinch of salt, and the ginger in a medium 
bowl. Stir together the milk and butter in a small 
bowl. Stir the milk-butter mixture into the flour mixture. 
Set the batter aside. 
2. Gently fold together the raspberries, blackberries, 
lemon juice, remaining 3/4 cup sugar, a pinch 
of salt, the remaining pinch of cinnamon, and 2 tablespoons 
water in a large bowl. Transfer mixture 
to a large, straight-sided skillet. Cover; bring to a 
boil over medium-high heat, stirring occasionally. 
3. Drop 8 large dollops of batter on top of the berry 
mixture using 2 spoons, spacing them evenly. Sprinkle 
the dumplings with the cinnamon-sugar mixture. 
Cover; reduce heat to medium. Cook until the 
dumplings are cooked through and the juices are 
bubbling, about 15 minutes. Serve warm, drizzled 
with cream. 
FRUIT DESSERTS 403 








apple-raisin pandowdy 

SERVES 8 

3 pounds mixed apples, such as Rome 
Beauty, Empire, and Cortland, peeled, 
cored, and cut into  -thick wedges 


1 cup golden raisins 

1/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons packed dark 
brown sugar 


2 tablespoons all-purpose flour, plus more 
for the work surface 


1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice 
Pinch of ground cardamom 


Pinch of ground allspice 

Pinch of salt 

2 tablespoons unsalted butter, cut into 
small pieces 


Toasted Pecan Dough (recipe follows) 

Heavy cream, for brushing 

Sanding sugar, for sprinkling 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Toss together the apples, 
raisins, brown sugar, flour, lemon juice, cardamom, 
allspice, and salt in a large bowl. Transfer 
to a 9-inch deep-dish pie plate. Dot the top with butter; 
set aside. 
2. Transfer the dough to a lightly floured work surface. 
Roll out to an 1  round about 1/8 inch thick. 
Carefully place the dough on top of the apple mixture. 
Fold the edge under itself, crimping if desired. 
Chill in the freezer until firm, about 15 minutes. 
3. Brush the dough with cream, and sprinkle with 
sanding sugar. Bake until the crust is set and beginning 
to brown, about 45 minutes. Remove from 
the oven; gently push some of the crust into the filling 
using a spoon. Bake until the crust is golden 
brown and crisp and the juices are bubbling, 25 to 
35 minutes more. If the crust is browning too 
quickly, cover loosely with foil. Let cool on a wire 
rack 1 hour before serving. 






toasted pecan dough 

MAKES ENOUGH FOR 1 PANDOWDY 

1/4 cup pecans 

1 cup all-purpose flour 
1 teaspoon sugar 


1/2 teaspoon salt 

1/2 cup (1 stick) cold unsalted butter, cut into 
small pieces 


3 to 4 tablespoons ice water 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Toast the pecans on 
a rimmed baking sheet in the oven, stirring occasionally, 
until fragrant and golden brown, about 
10 minutes. Let cool completely. Coarsely grind the 
pecans in a food processor. Add the flour, sugar, and 
salt; process until combined. 
2. Add the butter; process until the mixture resembles 
coarse meal, about 10 seconds. With the 
processor running, add the ice water in a slow, 
steady stream just until the dough comes together. 
3. Turn out the dough onto a piece of plastic wrap. 
Shape into a disk; wrap in plastic. Refrigerate at 
least 1 hour or up to 1 day before using.






lemon crepes 

MAKES ABOUT 18; SERVES 6 

The crepes can be made 1 day ahead and refrigerated, 
wrapped in plastic wrap. To reheat, wrap 
them in foil and warm in a 200 degrees F oven. 

6 tablespoons unsalted butter, cut into 
small pieces, plus about 1 tablespoon, 
melted, for the pan 


3/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons all-purpose flour 
1/4 cup sugar 
1/4 teaspoon salt 


11/4 cups milk (not skim) 
1/4 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 

3 large eggs 
Lemon-Caramel Sauce (recipe follows) 


Candied Lemon Slices (recipe follows) 

404 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


1. Bring 2 tablespoons water to a boil in a small 
saucepan. Reduce heat; add 6 tablespoons butter, a 
little at a time, whisking until the butter is completely 
melted. 
2. Whisk together the flour, sugar, and salt in a 
medium bowl. In a separate bowl, whisk together 
the milk, vanilla, and eggs. Gradually add the milk 
mixture to the flour mixture, whisking until smooth. 
Whisk in the butter mixture. Pour the batter 
through a fine sieve into a bowl; discard lumps. 
Transfer the batter to an airtight container; refrigerate 
at least 2 hours (or overnight). 
3. Preheat the oven to 200 degrees F. Lightly coat a 6- to 
7-inch crepe pan or nonstick skillet with melted butter. 
Heat over medium heat until just starting to 
smoke. Remove the pan from the heat; pour 2 to 3 
tablespoons batter (depending on size of pan) in 
the center. Swirl to cover the bottom. Reduce heat 
to medium-low; return the pan to the heat. Cook 
until the edges of the crepe turn golden and the 
center is dry, about 45 seconds. Flip the crepe; cook 
until the underside is brown in spots, about 45 seconds 
more. 
4. Slide the crepe onto an ovenproof plate; cover 
with foil, and transfer to the oven. Repeat the 
process with the remaining batter, coating the pan 
with more butter as needed. 
5. Fold each crepe into quarters to form a triangle. 
To serve, arrange 3 crepes on each plate; drizzle 
with lemon-caramel sauce and garnish with candied 
lemon slices. 






lemon-caramel sauce 

MAKES ABOUT 11/4 CUPS 

The sauce can be refrigerated in an airtight container 
for up to 3 days. Warm over gentle heat 
just before serving. 

1 cup sugar 
3 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 


1 tablespoon limoncello (Italian lemon-
flavored liqueur; optional) 


2 tablespoons unsalted butter, cut into 
small pieces 


1. Heat the sugar and 1/4 cup water in a medium 
heavy-bottomed saucepan over medium-high heat, 
stirring occasionally, until the sugar has dissolved 
and the syrup is clear. Continue to cook, without 
stirring, until the syrup comes to a boil, occasionally 
washing down the sides of the pan with a wet 
pastry brush to prevent crystals from forming. Let 
the syrup boil, gently swirling the pan occasionally, 
until dark amber. 
2. Remove from heat; whisk in the lemon juice, 
liqueur (if desired), butter, and 2 tablespoons water. 
(The caramel will steam and spatter.) Serve warm. 






candied lemon slices 

MAKES 1 DOZEN 

The lemon slices can be stored in an airtight container 
at room temperature up to 1 day. 

1 large lemon 
1 cup sugar 


1. Prepare an ice-water bath; set aside. Using a mandoline 
or sharp knife, cut the lemon into 12 paper-
thin slices; discard the seeds and ends of the rind. 
2. Bring a medium saucepan of water to a rolling 
boil. Remove from the heat, and add the lemon 
slices; stir until softened, about 1 minute. Drain, and 
immediately plunge the slices into the ice-water 
bath. Drain. 
3. Bring the sugar and 1 cup water to a boil in a 
medium skillet, swirling to dissolve the sugar. 
When the liquid is clear and bubbling, reduce heat 
to medium-low. Add the lemon slices, arranging 
them in one layer with tongs. Simmer (do not let 
boil) until the rinds are translucent, about 1 hour. 
4. Transfer to a baking sheet lined with parchment. 
Let stand until ready to serve. 
FRUIT DESSERTS 405 


late summer fruits in rose 

SERVES 6 

If you cannot find pluots, a plum-apricot hybrid, 
you can substitute more plums. 

3 plums 

3 pluots 

1/2 bottle dry rose (about 2 cups) 

1/2 cup sugar 

1/2 pint blackberries (about 1 cup) 

1/2 pint raspberries (about 11/3 cups) 

1. Prepare an ice-water bath. Score an X on the bottom 
of each plum. Bring a medium saucepan of 
water to a simmer. Add the plums; cook until the 
skins begin to loosen at the X, about 1 minute (less 
if the fruit is very ripe). Transfer to the ice-water 
bath to cool. Remove the skins; discard. Halve each 
plum to remove the pit; cut each half into wedges. 
Repeat the process with the pluots. 
2. Whisk the wine, sugar, and 1 cup cold water in a 
large bowl until the sugar has dissolved. Stir in the 
plums, pluots, and berries. Refrigerate 1 hour. Divide 
the mixture among 6 bowls, and serve. 
vanilla-bean baked apples 

MAKES 4 

4 thick-skinned, mildly sweet apples, 
such as Rome Beauty 


3 tablespoons packed dark-brown sugar 

2 tablespoons unsalted butter, softened 

2 tablespoons finely chopped toasted 
pecans, plus more for sprinkling 


1/2 large vanilla bean, halved lengthwise, 
seeds scraped and reserved 


1/8 teaspoon salt 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees  F. Using a cylindrical 
apple corer, core the apples three-quarters of the 
way down. Fit snugly in an ovenproof skillet or a 
loaf pan. 
2. Stir together the sugar, butter, nuts, vanilla seeds, 
and salt in a small bowl. Divide the sugar mixture 
among the apples (about 2 teaspoons each). Sprinkle 
with nuts. Bake until the apples are soft, about 
1 hour. Serve warm with pan syrup spooned on top. 
orange-lime mousse 

SERVES 4 

Homemade citrus curd-a mixture of eggs, sugar, 
butter, and orange and lime juices-adds tangy 
flavor to this mousse. 

4 large egg yolks, plus 1 large whole egg 

3/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons sugar 
1/4 cup fresh orange juice 
1/4 cup fresh lime juice (2 to 3 limes) 


6 tablespoons unsalted butter 
1 cup heavy cream, chilled 


1 teaspoon ground cinnamon 

1 lime, halved lengthwise and thinly 
sliced into half-moons 


1 navel orange, halved lengthwise and 
thinly sliced into half-moons 


1. Make the citrus curd. Prepare an ice-water bath; 
set aside. Cook the egg yolks, egg, 3/4 cup sugar, and 
juices in a medium saucepan over medium heat, 
whisking constantly (be sure to reach the sides and 
bottom of the pan) until thickened, 5 to 7 minutes. 
Remove from heat. 
2. Whisk in the butter, 1 tablespoon at a time. Set 
the pan in the ice-water bath; whisk until cool, about 
5 minutes. Pass the curd through a sieve into a 
medium bowl. Press plastic wrap directly onto the 
surface to prevent a skin from forming. Refrigerate 
until set, 30 to 45 minutes. Whisk the cream and 2 
tablespoons sugar until stiff peaks form; refrigerate. 
3. Whisk one-third of the whipped cream into the 
curd. Gently fold in the remaining whipped cream. 
Divide among serving bowls; refrigerate until ready 
to serve. Dust with cinnamon; garnish with citrus. 
406 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


individual fruit crisps with 
cinnamon-vanilla ice cream 

SERVES 6 

This recipe makes 3 peach and 3 cherry crisps. 
The ice cream is made by mixing cinnamon into 
store-bought vanilla ice cream and refreezing it. 
We call for fresh cherries, but frozen ones will 
work just as well; you'll need to adjust amounts in 
step 3: Reduce the brown sugar to 1/3 cup and increase 
the cornstarch to 2 tablespoons. 

2 pints vanilla ice cream, softened slightly 

11/2 teaspoons ground cinnamon 
3 large peaches (about 11/4 pounds) 

2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 
1 cup packed dark-brown sugar 


1/2 teaspoon ground ginger 
2 tablespoons cornstarch 


3 cups sour cherries (about 14 ounces), 
pitted 


1/2 cup yellow cornmeal 
1 cup all-purpose flour 


1/2 teaspoon baking powder 
Pinch of salt 


1/4 cup granulated sugar 

8 tablespoons (1 stick) unsalted butter, 
cut into pieces 


1/2 cup sliced blanched almonds (11/2 ounces), 
toasted 


1. Make the cinnamon-vanilla ice cream: Cover the 
bottom of an 8-inch-square baking dish with one-
third of the ice cream; smooth into an even layer. 
Sprinkle with 1/2 teaspoon cinnamon. Repeat to 
make 2 more ice-cream layers, sprinkling each with 
1/2 teaspoon cinnamon. Cover with plastic wrap, and 
freeze until ready to use, at least 45 minutes. 
2. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees  F. Bring a medium 
saucepan of water to a boil. Cut a small, shallow X 
in the bottom of each peach. Blanch the peaches 
until the skins begin to loosen, about 30 seconds; 
drain. Peel and pit the peaches, and then cut into 
 -thick wedges. Transfer to a bowl; toss with 
1 tablespoon lemon juice, 1/4 cup brown sugar, the 
ginger, and 1 tablespoon cornstarch. Set aside. 

3. Put the cherries in a bowl; toss with 1/2 cup brown 
sugar and the remaining tablespoon lemon juice 
and cornstarch. 
4. Whisk together the cornmeal, flour, baking powder, 
salt, the remaining 1/4 cup brown sugar, and the 
granulated sugar in a medium bowl. Blend in the 
butter with a pastry blender or two knives until it 
resembles coarse meal. Stir in the almonds. Squeeze 
to form a crumbly topping. 
5. Fill 6 mini foil pie plates (each 41/2 inches in diameter 
and 11/4 inches high) with fruit, 3 with cherry 
mixture and 3 with peach mixture. Transfer to 
rimmed baking sheets; divide the topping among 
the fruit pies. Bake until the juices are bubbling, 
about 30 minutes. Let the crisps cool slightly; serve 
warm with scoops of cinnamon-vanilla ice cream. 
mango-pineapple buckle 

SERVES 4 

1 stick (1/2 cup) unsalted butter, 
room temperature, plus more for 
the baking dish 


1 small or 1/2 medium pineapple (about 
13/4 pounds), peeled, cored, and cut into 
  pieces 


2 ripe mangoes, peeled and cut into   
pieces 


2 tablespoons dark-brown sugar 

3/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons all-purpose flour 
1 teaspoon ground cinnamon 
1/2 teaspoon salt 

1/4 teaspoon baking soda 

1/2 cup granulated sugar 
1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 


2 large eggs 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Butter a 2-quart baking 
dish. Toss the pineapple, mangoes, and brown 
sugar together in a bowl. In a separate bowl, whisk 
together the flour, cinnamon, salt, and baking soda. 
2. Beat the butter and granulated sugar in a mixing 
bowl until fluffy, about 2 minutes. Beat in the 
vanilla. Add the eggs, one at a time, beating well 
FRUIT DESSERTS 407 


after each. Add the flour mixture; beat until just 
combined. Measure out 1 cup fruit mixture; fold the 
rest into the batter. 

3. Spread the batter into the prepared baking dish; 
sprinkle the reserved fruit over the top. Bake until 
golden on top and a cake tester inserted in the center 
comes out clean, 45 to 50 minutes. Serve warm. 
mango-papaya salad with mint 

MAKES 5 SERVINGS 

1 mango, cut into   cubes 

1 papaya, cut into   cubes 
1 tablespoon honey 


1 tablespoon chopped fresh mint 

Stir together all the ingredients. Refrigerate, covered, 
until ready to serve, up to 2 days. 

melon balls with moscato 

SERVES 6 

2 honeydew melons (6 pounds each), 
halved and seeded 


2 tablespoons small tarragon leaves 

11/2 cups chilled Moscato or other 
sweet sparkling wine 

With a melon baller, scoop out enough melon to 
measure 6 cups. Divide the melon among 6 dessert 
bowls. Sprinkle with tarragon, and pour 1/4 cup 
Moscato over each serving. Serve immediately. 

lemon, blackberry, 
and meringue parfait 

SERVES 6 

Swiss Meringue (page 657) 

1 cup creme fraiche 
Lemon Curd ( page 656) 


1 cup ripe blackberries 
1 cup chilled heavy cream, whipped 


1. Preheat the oven to 200 degrees F, with racks in the upper 
and lower thirds. Line 2 large rimmed baking sheets 
with parchment paper. Fit a pastry bag with an 
Ateco #22 star tip; fill with meringue. Pipe 12 to 16 
long swirly shapes onto one of the prepared sheets. 
Gently spread the remaining meringue 3/4 inch thick 
onto the other. 

2. Bake 20 minutes. Reduce the oven heat to 175 degrees F; 
continue baking until the meringue is dry but still 
white, 35 minutes more, rotating the sheets halfway 
through. Transfer to a wire rack to cool completely. 
Set aside the swirls; crumble the meringue sheet. 
3. Meanwhile, in a small bowl, combine the creme 
fraiche and 1 cup lemon curd; refrigerate. 
4. To assemble the parfaits, layer the creme fraiche 
mixture, crumbled meringue, and blackberries in 
serving glasses. Spoon some of the remaining 1/2 cup 
lemon curd into each glass. Top with whipped cream; 
garnish with meringue swirls. Serve immediately. 
apricot-cherry bake 

SERVES 8 TO 10 

Unsalted butter, at room temperature, 
for the baking dish 

3 pounds small ripe apricots (20 to 24), 
sliced into sixths 


1/2 pound cherries, pitted (about 11/4 cups) 

1/3 cup all-purpose flour, plus more for the 
work surface 


1 cup plus 4 teaspoons sugar 

1/2 recipe Martha's Perfect Pate Brisee 
(page 647) 


1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Butter a 2-quart baking 
dish; set aside. In a large bowl, toss the fruit with 
the flour and 1 cup sugar. Place in the prepared baking 
dish. 
2. On a lightly floured work surface, roll out the pate 
brisee into a 1  round. Cut into 4   strips; 
then cut the strips crosswise into 3- or 4-inch pieces. 
Place over fruit mixture in a patchlike pattern. Refrigerate 
dough about 30 minutes. 
3. Lightly brush the dough with water, and sprinkle 
with remaining 4 teaspoons sugar. Transfer to 
oven; bake until crust is golden brown and the 
juices are bubbling, 50 to 60 minutes. Transfer to 
a wire rack, and let cool before serving. 
408 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


poached pears with ginger 

SERVES 4 

These pears may be refrigerated in their cooking 
liquid overnight. 

1 cup dry white wine 

2 tablespoons port or full-bodied red wine 

3 cups water 

1/4 cup honey 

1 piece (3/4 inch) fresh ginger, peeled 
and cut crosswise into 6 slices 


1 vanilla bean, split in half lengthwise 
and scraped 


4 ripe, firm Bartlett or Comice pears 

1. Bring all the ingredients except the pears to a 
simmer over medium-high heat in a large saucepan. 
Reduce heat to medium-low; cook 5 minutes. 
2. Meanwhile, peel the pears and cut them in half 
lengthwise. Use a small spoon or melon baller to 
scoop out the core and seeds from each half, leaving 
the stems intact. Trim the fibrous strip from the 
center with a paring knife. Gently lower the pears 
into the pot. If they are not completely covered by 
liquid, lay a piece of parchment paper directly on 
the pears. 
3. Cook until a paring knife slides easily into the 
pears, meeting slight resistance, 15 to 20 minutes. 
Remove from heat; let cool in liquid 30 minutes. 
Use a slotted spoon to transfer the pears to a large 
bowl; cover with parchment paper. Cook the liquid 
over medium heat until syrupy, about 15 minutes; 
discard the vanilla pod and ginger. Let cool. Serve 
2 pear halves in each bowl; spoon the syrup over 
the pears. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 235 CALORIES, 1 G FAT, 

0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 50 G CARBOHYDRATE, 10 MG SODIUM, 

1 G PROTEIN, 5 G FIBER 

red currant fool 

SERVES 4 TO 6 

4 tablespoons (1/4 cup) unsalted butter 

31/2 cups fresh red currants (about 18 ounces), 
stems removed 

3/4 cup sugar 
11/2 cups heavy cream 

1. Melt the butter in a large skillet set over medium 
heat, and stir in the currants and sugar. Cover, and 
reduce heat to low. Cook, stirring occasionally, until 
the sugar has dissolved and the currants have softened, 
about 5 minutes. 
2. Remove the skillet from the heat, and lightly 
crush the fruit with the back of a wooden spoon. 
Don't mash to a puree; some texture should remain. 
Transfer the mixture to a bowl, and cool completely 
in the refrigerator before proceeding. 
3. In a small bowl, whisk the cream until it holds 
soft peaks. Set aside 1/2 cup fruit mixture. Gently fold 
the whipped cream into the remaining fruit mixture, 
leaving it marbled. Serve immediately in individual 
bowls, garnished with a spoonful of the 
reserved fruit mixture. 
FRUIT DESSERTS 409 


southern-style individual 
peach cobblers 

MAKES FOUR 6-INCH COBBLERS 

To make one 10-inch cake, melt 2 teaspoons butter 
in the skillet before adding the batter, and 
bake for 35 minutes. 

2 pounds firm, ripe peaches (about 4), 
pitted and cut into 8 wedges each 


1 cup sugar 

1 teaspoon ground cinnamon 
11/2 cups all-purpose flour 

2 teaspoons baking powder 
1/2 teaspoon salt 


4 tablespoons unsalted butter, 
melted, plus 4 teaspoons 


1/2 cup milk 

1 large egg 

1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. In a large bowl, toss 
the peaches with 1/4 cup sugar and 1/2 teaspoon cinnamon; 
set aside. In a medium bowl, whisk together 
the flour, baking powder, salt, remaining 3/4 cup 
sugar, and remaining 1/2 teaspoon cinnamon. In another 
bowl, whisk 4 tablespoons melted butter with 
the milk and egg. Whisk the butter mixture into the 
flour mixture. 
2. Melt 1 teaspoon butter in a 6-inch ovenproof skillet 
over medium heat. Once the skillet is hot, remove 
from heat. Pour one-quarter of the batter into 
the skillet. Spread the batter evenly over the bottom. 
Spoon one-quarter of the peach mixture over 
the batter. Repeat with three more skillets. Transfer 
to the oven, and bake until the cobblers are set, 
25 to 30 minutes. Remove from the oven; let cool 
slightly. Serve warm in the skillets. 
warm nectarine turnovers 

MAKES ABOUT 18 

If at any point the dough gets too soft to work 
with or begins to shrink, refrigerate for 15 minutes 
before proceeding. 

2 cups all-purpose flour, plus more 
for the work surface 


1 teaspoon baking powder 

1/2 teaspoon salt 

1/2 cup (1 stick) chilled unsalted butter, 
cut into small pieces 


1/2 cup ice water 
13/4 pounds large, ripe nectarines (about 4) 

1/4 cup granulated sugar 
1/4 cup honey 


2 to 3 cups vegetable oil, for frying 
Confectioners' sugar, for dusting 


1. Sift the flour, baking powder, and salt into a large 
bowl. Using your fingertips, work the butter into the 
flour mixture until it resembles coarse meal. Pour 
in the ice water; toss lightly, gathering the dough 
into a ball. Dust the dough with a little flour, and 
flatten it into a disk. Seal the disk in plastic wrap, 
and refrigerate at least 1 hour or overnight. 
2. Halve the nectarines lengthwise, and discard the 
pits. Leaving the skins on (to give the filling a pretty 
rose color), chop the fruit into   chunks. 
3. In a large, heavy skillet, place the nectarines, 
granulated sugar, and honey, and fold together. 
Bring to a boil over high heat; reduce heat to 
medium-low. Simmer, stirring, until the mixture is 
thick enough to hold its shape in a spoon, about 
25 minutes. Transfer the filling to a bowl; let cool. 
4. On a lightly floured work surface, roll out the 
dough as thinly as possible (about 1/16 inch thick). 
With a 4-inch fluted cutter, cut the dough into as 
many rounds as possible. Gather the scraps into a 
ball, and roll out the dough as before. Again, cut out 
as many rounds as possible. 
5. Place about 1 tablespoon filling on the lower third 
of each round. Moisten the edges of the rounds 
lightly with cold water. Fold the rounds in half over 
410 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


the filling, and press the edges together tightly. Seal 
the edges with fork tines dipped in flour. 

6. Preheat the oven to the lowest setting. Line a shallow 
baking dish with paper towels, and place in the 
heated oven. In a large, heavy skillet, add enough 
oil to reach 1 inch up the sides, and place over 
medium-high heat. When the oil registers 350 degrees F 
on a deep-fry thermometer, cook the turnovers, 
turning them occasionally with tongs or a slotted 
spoon, until they are crisp and golden, about 4 minutes 
total. 
7. Transfer the cooked turnovers to the lined dish 
in the oven to drain. Keep warm until all the 
turnovers are cooked. Dust the warm turnovers with 
confectioners' sugar just before serving. 
berry brown betty 

SERVES 4 

3 cups fresh raspberries (red and golden, 
if available) 


11/2 teaspoons fresh lemon juice 

5 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted 
1 tablespoon granulated sugar 


2 cups fresh brioche bread crumbs 
(about 6 ounces) 


1/3 cup packed light-brown sugar 
2 tablespoons all-purpose flour 


Pinch of freshly grated nutmeg 
Sweetened whipped cream, for serving 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. In a medium bowl, mix 
all but 1/4 cup berries with the lemon juice, and set 
aside to macerate. Brush 4 6-ounce ramekins with 
1 tablespoon butter; coat the inside of each with 
granulated sugar, and set aside. 
2. In a small bowl, combine the bread crumbs with 
the remaining 4 tablespoons butter, and set aside. 
Sprinkle the brown sugar, flour, and nutmeg over 
the raspberries, and gently toss to combine. Divide 
one-third of the bread crumbs evenly among the 
ramekins. Top with half the berries, and then with 
another third of the bread crumbs. Repeat with the 
remaining berries and bread crumbs. Gently press 
down on the layers. 
3. Bake until the crumbs are golden and the berry 
juices are bubbling, about 20 minutes. Remove from 
the oven, and let cool 5 minutes. 
4. Invert the ramekins onto serving plates. Remove 
the ramekins, and top each dessert with whipped 
cream; garnish with reserved berries. 
blackberry-peach trifle 

SERVES 6 TO 8 

Unsalted butter, room temperature, 
for the baking dish 


1 cup all-purpose flour, plus more 
for the baking dish 


1 pound ripe yellow peaches 
(about 3) 


1 pound ripe white peaches 
(about 3) 


1 pound fresh blackberries 
(about 3 heaping cups) 


3/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons sugar 
3 cups heavy cream 
2 large eggs 
1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 


11/4 teaspoons baking powder 
1/4 teaspoon salt 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F, with the rack in the 
center. Butter and flour a 9 x 1  baking dish; 
set aside. Prepare an ice-water bath in a large bowl; 
set aside. Fill a large saucepan two-thirds full with 
water; bring to a simmer over medium-high heat. 
Score the bottom of each peach. Gently put the 
peaches in the simmering water. Using a slotted 
spoon, remove the peaches from the water when 
the skin easily peels away from the flesh, 1 to 2 minutes. 
Plunge into the ice bath until cool enough to 
handle; peel immediately. 
2. Cut each peach into 8 slices. Cut one-third of the 
slices in half crosswise (makes about 11/2 cups), and 
set aside. Place the remaining slices in a medium 
covered bowl, and set aside. In another medium 
bowl, combine the blackberries and 2 tablespoons 
sugar. Set aside to macerate, stirring occasionally. 
FRUIT DESSERTS 411 


3. In a small bowl, whip 1 cup cream until stiff peaks 
form; set aside for the batter. Whip the remaining 
2 cups cream, and refrigerate. 
4. In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the 
paddle attachment, lightly beat the eggs. Add the 
remaining 3/4 cup sugar, and beat until the mixture 
is pale and thick, about 3 minutes. Stir in the vanilla. 
Into a small bowl, sift together the flour, baking 
powder, and salt. Gradually stir the flour mixture 
into the egg mixture. Gently fold the reserved 
whipped cream into the batter in 3 additions. Pour 
the batter into the prepared dish; spread evenly. 
5. Scatter the reserved peach pieces and one-third 
of the blackberries over the batter. Bake until the 
cake is golden and a cake tester inserted in the center 
comes out clean, about 35 minutes. Transfer to 
a wire rack, and let cool completely. 
6. To assemble: Cut the cake into 6 pieces. Place 3 
pieces in the bottom of a straight-sided glass serving 
bowl or compote. Spoon half the fruit (and berry 
juice) over the cake. Spoon half of the refrigerated 
whipped cream over the fruit. Repeat with the 
remaining cake, fruit, and cream. Drizzle the remaining 
berry juice over the trifle. 
tropical fruit salad 

SERVES 8 

1 pineapple (about 5 pounds), peeled, 
cored, and cut crosswise into thin slices 


1 papaya (about 1 pound), peeled, 
halved lengthwise, seeded, and cut 
crosswise into thin slices 


1 star fruit, cut crosswise into thin slices 
2 tablespoons sugar 


1/2 cup fresh lime juice, plus 3 tablespoons 
grated lime zest strips, for garnish (4 to 6 
limes total) 


Light rum (optional) 

Arrange the pineapple on a large platter. Top with 
a layer each of papaya and star fruit. Sprinkle the 
fruit with sugar, lime juice, and rum, if desired. Garnish 
with lime zest. 

macerated berry 
and creme fraiche parfait 


SERVES 4 

The rich, tangy creme fraiche and a bit of vinegar 
cut the sweetness of the berries. You can use 
vanilla ice cream in place of the creme fraiche. 

12 ounces assorted berries, such as 
strawberries, blueberries, raspberries, 
and blackberries 


2 tablespoons superfine sugar 

2 tablespoons balsamic vinegar 
1 8-ounce container creme fraiche 


Amaretti biscuits 

1. Combine the berries in a medium bowl. Sprinkle 
with the sugar and vinegar. Let sit, stirring occasionally, 
until the berries soften and start to release 
juices, about 30 minutes. 
2. Layer the berries with the creme fraiche in parfait 
glasses. Serve immediately or refrigerate up 
to 3 hours. Just before serving, sprinkle with crumbled 
amaretti biscuits. 






caramelized pineapple 
with vanilla ice cream 

SERVES 6 

This dessert relies on the same browning and 
deglazing techniques used for savory dishes. 
Many fruits benefit from a quick saute, and their 
natural sugars-brought to the surface as juices 
evaporate-aid in the caramelization process. If 
you prefer not to use rum, you can substitute 
more pineapple juice. 

1/2 cup dark rum 
1/2 cup pineapple juice 


4 tablespoons unsalted butter 
1 ripe pineapple, peeled, sliced into 
 -thick rounds, cored 
1/2 cup sugar 


Vanilla ice cream, for serving 

412 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


1. Combine the rum and pineapple juice in a glass 
measuring cup. Heat 2 tablespoons butter in a large 
skillet over medium-high heat until foaming. Add 
half of the pineapple slices, and cook until well 
browned on both sides, 5 to 8 minutes. Transfer to 
a baking pan. 
2. Sprinkle the pan with 1/4 cup sugar; cook until the 
sugar caramelizes to a golden brown, 1 to 2 minutes. 
3. Turn the heat off or hold the skillet away from the 
heat, and carefully add 1/2 cup rum mixture. 
4. Turn the heat on or return the pan to the heat, 
and stir with a wooden spoon, scraping loose any 
caramelized bits on the bottom of the skillet. Simmer 
the sauce until reduced and slightly thickened, 
about 3 minutes. Pour through a fine sieve into a 
bowl, and set aside. Wash the skillet, and repeat. 
Cut the pineapple slices, and serve over ice cream 
drizzled with warm sauce. 






classic rhubarb fool 
with farm-fresh cream 

SERVES 6 TO 8 

1 pound red rhubarb (about 9 stalks), 
leaves discarded, stalks cut into   
pieces (about 4 cups) 


1 cup sugar 
3 cups heavy cream 


1. Put rhubarb, sugar, and 2 tablespoons water into 
a medium saucepan. Cover, and bring to a simmer 
over medium-high heat. Reduce heat to medium-
low. Stir once; cook, uncovered, until rhubarb has 
completely softened, about 8 minutes. Cool slightly. 
2. Transfer rhubarb mixture to a food processor, 
and puree until smooth. Transfer to a small bowl. Refrigerate 
rhubarb puree until cool, about 30 minutes. 
3. Beat cream with an electric mixer or by hand until 
soft peaks form. Gently fold rhubarb puree into the 
whipped cream in 2 batches, leaving some streaks 
remaining. Spoon into glasses. 






sour cherry charlottes 

MAKES 6 

31/2 cups frozen sour cherries (about 1 pound) 

1 cup sugar 

3 tablespoons cornstarch 

24 slices (about 1 loaf) very thin white 
sandwich bread, crusts removed 


3/4 cup (11/2 sticks) unsalted butter, melted 
Sour Cherry Compote (recipe follows) 

1. Toss together cherries, sugar, and cornstarch in 
a medium bowl. Set aside; let cherries thaw slightly, 
about 35 minutes. 
2. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Using a pastry brush, 
generously brush one side of each slice of bread 
with the butter. Reserve 6 slices; cut remaining 
slices in half to form 36 rectangles. Line sides and 
bottom of each cup of a jumbo (6-cup) muffin tin 
with 6 rectangles, overlapping bread and placing 
buttered side against tin. 
3. Toss cherry mixture to combine. Spoon into bread-
lined cups. Top each with a reserved bread square, 
buttered side down; press firmly onto cherries. 
4. Bake charlottes until tops and sides are golden 
and crisp, 35 to 40 minutes. Transfer tin to a wire 
rack; let stand until charlottes have cooled slightly 
and are just firm, 15 to 20 minutes. Using an offset 
spatula or knife, loosen sides of charlottes from tin, 
and unmold; invert onto serving plates. Serve warm, 
with warm sour cherry compote on the side. 






sour cherry compote 

MAKES ABOUT 2 CUPS 

3 cups frozen sour cherries (a little less 
than 1 pound) 


1 cup sugar 

2 tablespoons balsamic vinegar 

Put cherries, sugar, and vinegar into a small 
saucepan. Cook over medium heat, stirring occasionally, 
until cherries have burst and mixture begins 
to thicken, about 10 minutes. Serve warm. 

FRUIT DESSERTS 413 








chilled cantaloupe soup 
with tarragon syrup 

SERVES 6 

for the soup 

1 large ripe cantaloupe (about 4 pounds), 
seeds and rind removed, cut into chunks, 
plus thin wedges for garnish 


1/4 cup sour cream 
2 tablespoons honey, or to taste 


4 teaspoons fresh lemon juice 
Pinch of coarse salt 


for the syrup 

3/4 cup sugar 
4 sprigs tarragon, plus more for garnish 
1 teaspoon fresh lemon juice 


1. Make the soup: Working in 2 batches, puree cantaloupe, 
sour cream, honey, lemon juice, and salt in 
a blender until smooth. Press through a fine sieve 
into a bowl. Refrigerate until cold, about 1 hour. 
2. Make the syrup: Bring sugar and 3/4 cup water to 
a boil in a saucepan, stirring until sugar has dissolved. 
Boil until syrup has reduced to 2/3 cup, about 
7 minutes. Remove from heat; add tarragon. Transfer 
to a bowl; refrigerate until cold, 1 hour. 
3. Puree syrup, tarragon, and lemon juice in a 
blender until smooth. Refrigerate until ready to use; 
stir just before serving. 
4. Divide soup among bowls. Drizzle with tarragon 
syrup; garnish with cantaloupe wedges and tarragon 
sprigs. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 173 CALORIES, 2 G FAT, 

7 MG CHOLESTEROL, 40 G CARBOHYDRATE, 44 MG SODIUM, 

1 G PROTEIN, 1 G FIBER 

peach-raspberry clafouti 

SERVES 6 TO 8 

1/4 cup (1/2 stick) unsalted butter, melted, 
plus more for dish 


11/2 cups Lillet Blanc or white wine 

11/4 cups sugar 
1 vanilla bean, halved lengthwise, 
seeds scraped and reserved 

2 pounds firm, ripe peaches (5 to 7), 
halved and pitted 


6 ounces fresh raspberries 

4 large eggs 

1/4 teaspoon salt 

6 tablespoons all-purpose flour 

1 cup whole milk 

1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 
1/2 teaspoon finely grated orange zest 


1. Butter a 1  round baking dish; set aside. 
Bring Lillet, 11/2 cups water, 3/4 cup sugar, and the 
vanilla bean and seeds to a boil in a large, wide 
saucepan over high heat, stirring until sugar has 
dissolved. Add peaches, cut side down, and cover 
with a round of parchment paper, placing it directly 
on top of peaches. Reduce heat to medium. Simmer 
until peaches are very tender, about 15 minutes. Remove 
from heat; let stand 30 minutes. 
2. Preheat the oven to 325 degrees F. Using a slotted spoon, 
transfer peaches, cut side up, to prepared dish; reserve 
1/4 cup poaching liquid (discard the vanilla 
bean). Arrange raspberries among peaches. 
3. Whisk eggs, remaining 1/2 cup sugar, and the salt 
in a medium bowl. Gradually whisk in flour. Whisk 
in milk, melted butter, vanilla extract, orange zest, 
and reserved poaching liquid. Pour around fruit. 
4. Bake until edges are puffed and golden, 40 to 
45 minutes. Let cool on a wire rack 20 minutes before 
serving. The clafouti can be refrigerated, covered, 
up to 1 day. 
414 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


sour cherry clafouti 

SERVES 6 

3 cups pitted fresh sour cherries (canned 
or frozen may be used) 


3 tablespoons Cognac 
Unsalted butter, for pie plate 


1/2 cup sugar 

3/4 cup whole milk 
1/4 cup heavy cream 
3 large eggs 


1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 
Pinch of salt 


2/3 cup all-purpose flour 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Stir together cherries 
and Cognac; set aside. 
2. Butter a 9-inch glass pie plate or a fluted porcelain 
tart dish. Dust with 1 teaspoon sugar; set aside. 
3. Blend milk, cream, eggs, remaining sugar, the 
vanilla, salt, and flour in a blender on high speed 1 
minute, scraping down sides halfway through. 
4. Pour 1/2 cup batter into prepared pie plate. 
Arrange the cherries evenly over batter; drizzle with 
the Cognac. Pour remaining batter over cherries. 
5. Bake clafouti until top is puffed and golden brown 
and batter is set, 45 to 60 minutes. Serve warm. 
nectarine shortcakes 

MAKES 8 

1/2 pound nectarines (about 4), cut 
into   pieces 


1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice 
1/4 cup plus 2 teaspoons granulated sugar 


2 cups all-purpose flour, plus more 
for work surface 


1 tablespoon baking powder 

1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 
6 tablespoons cold unsalted butter, 
cut into small pieces 
1 cup heavy cream, plus more for brushing 


Fine sanding sugar, for sprinkling 

1. Preheat oven to 400 degrees  F. Combine nectarines, 
lemon juice, and 2 teaspoons granulated sugar. Let 
stand 15 minutes. 
2. Whisk together the flour, baking powder, salt, 
and remaining 1/4 cup granulated sugar in a large 
bowl. Using a pastry blender, cut in the butter until 
mixture forms small pieces. Stir in the cream. Fold 
in nectarine mixture. 
3. Turn out dough onto a lightly floured surface. Pat 
into an 8  round. Using a 2  cutter, cut 
out 8 rounds, and transfer to a parchment-lined baking 
sheet. Brush with cream; sprinkle with sanding 
sugar. Bake until golden brown, 20 to 25 minutes. 
Let cool on a wire rack. Any remaining shortcakes 
can be stored in an airtight container up to 1 day. 
FRUIT DESSERTS 415 


roasted peaches with nougat 

SERVES 4 

Serve these easy-to-prepare peaches with scoops 
of ice cream, and drizzle with pan juices. 

2 tablespoons unsalted butter 

2 tablespoons packed light-brown sugar 
4 ripe white peaches, halved lengthwise 
and pitted 
3 tablespoons honey 


4 to 6 ounces chewy almond nougat, 
coarsely chopped 


1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees  F, with rack in upper 
third. Melt butter in a large ovenproof skillet or 
saute pan over medium heat until foaming. Reduce 
heat to low; add sugar, stirring until it has dissolved. 
Add peaches, cut side down, and cook until they 
start to caramelize, 3 to 4 minutes. Flip, and drizzle 
with honey. 
2. Raise heat to medium-high. Bring pan juices to 
a boil. Remove from heat. 
3. Divide nougat pieces among peaches, arranging 
them in the center of each half. Spoon pan juices 
over the tops. 
4. Roast in oven until nougat melts and peaches 
turn golden brown and are tender when pierced 
with a fork, 10 to 12 minutes. Serve immediately. 
honey-roasted salted figs 

SERVES 6 TO 8 

1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil, plus more for 
baking sheet 


1/4 cup honey 
10 ounces dried Turkish figs 


10 ounces dried Black Mission figs 
1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 


2 small bunches assorted grapes, 
such as red and champagne 


1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees  F. Lightly brush a 
rimmed baking sheet with oil. Whisk oil and honey 
in a large bowl. Add figs; toss to coat. Arrange in a 
single layer on prepared sheet. Sprinkle with salt. 
2. Roast in the oven until fragrant and caramelized, 
12 to 15 minutes. Immediately loosen figs from 
sheet with a metal spatula. Let figs cool slightly, 
loosening again after 5 minutes. Transfer to a platter; 
serve with grapes. 
416 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


frozen desserts 



apricot sherbet 

SERVES 8 

Serve this sherbet with Almond Meringue Wafers 
(recipe follows). 

11/2 pounds very ripe small apricots (about 12) 

1 cup sugar 
1/4 cup light corn syrup 
1/4 cup fresh lemon juice (1 to 2 lemons) 


11/2 cups nonfat buttermilk 
1 cup milk 

1. Quarter the apricots, and remove the pits. Place 
the apricot quarters in a food processor, and puree 
until smooth, about 1 minute. Transfer to a medium 
bowl, and add the sugar, corn syrup, and lemon juice. 
Whisk to combine. Cover the bowl with plastic wrap, 
and macerate about 1 hour in the refrigerator. 
2. Pass the apricot mixture through a fine sieve into 
a medium bowl; discard the solids. Whisk in the 
buttermilk and milk. Cover with plastic wrap, and 
refrigerate until chilled, about 3 hours. 
3. Freeze the mixture in an ice-cream maker according 
to the manufacturer's instructions. Transfer 
to an airtight container; freeze up to 4 days. 
almond meringue wafers 

MAKES 2 DOZEN 

41/4 ounces sliced almonds (about 11/4 cups) 

3/4 cup sugar 
1/4 cup all-purpose flour 
3 large egg whites, at room temperature 
1/4 teaspoon salt 
1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Line 2 baking sheets 
with parchment paper; set aside. 
2. In a food processor, pulse about 1 cup almonds 
with 1/2 cup sugar until the almonds are finely 
ground. Add the flour, and pulse until combined. 
Transfer to a bowl. 
3. In the bowl of an electric mixer, whisk the egg 
whites, salt, vanilla, and remaining 1/4 cup sugar 
until soft and shiny peaks form. Gently fold into the 
dry ingredients until just blended. 
4. Drop the batter by the tablespoon, about 11/2 
inches apart, onto prepared baking sheets. Arrange 
3 sliced almonds on top of each cookie. 
5. Bake the cookies until the edges are lightly 
browned, about 14 minutes. Let the cookies cool 
slightly on baking sheets before transferring to wire 
racks. Let cool completely before serving. The cookies 
can be stored in an airtight container at room 
temperature up to 1 week. 
rhubarb and 
strawberry ice cream 

MAKES 1 QUART 

Unlike many ice cream recipes, this one does not 
contain eggs. 

1 pound trimmed rhubarb, cut into   
pieces (about 31/2 cups) 


3/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons sugar 
2 tablespoons water 
8 ounces ripe strawberries 

1 cup heavy cream 

1/2 cup milk 

2 tablespoons kirsch 

1. Place the rhubarb, 1/2 cup sugar, and the water in 
a saucepan over medium heat. Bring to a boil; reduce 
heat to medium-low; let simmer, stirring frequently, 
until rhubarb is very tender and beginning 
to fall apart, about 12 minutes. Remove from heat; 
transfer to a bowl; set aside. 
2. Place the strawberries in the bowl of a food 
processor; puree. Strain through a fine sieve or chinois 
into a bowl; set aside. 
3. Scald the cream and milk in a saucepan over 
medium heat. Do not let boil. Remove from heat, 
add the remaining 6 tablespoons sugar, and stir 
until the sugar is dissolved. Allow the mixture to 
cool to room temperature. 
418 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


4. In a medium bowl, combine the cooked rhubarb, 
strawberry puree, cream mixture, and kirsch. Cover 
with plastic wrap, and chill at least 2 hours or 
overnight. Freeze in an ice-cream maker according 
to the manufacturer's instructions. 
frozen lemon mousse 

SERVES 8 

This mousse can be made up to 3 days before 
serving. Ring molds may be purchased at specialty 
cookware stores. You can also use an 8-inch 
springform pan. 

8 to 10 lemons 
2 cups sugar 


8 large egg yolks, plus 2 whole eggs 

1 cup unsalted butter (2 sticks), cut 
into pieces 


11/2 cups plus 2 tablespoons heavy cream, 
chilled 

Candied Lemon Zest (recipe follows) 
1 8-ounce container creme fraiche 


1. Prepare an ice-water bath in a large bowl. Juice 
1 lemon; reserve the juice. Juice the additional 
lemons to yield 1 cup. Make the lemon curd: Place 
1 cup lemon juice and the sugar, egg yolks, whole 
eggs, and butter in saucepan; whisk to combine. 
Cook over medium heat, whisking constantly, until 
it begins to boil, about 10 minutes. 
2. Strain the curd through a fine-mesh strainer into 
a bowl set in the ice bath. Stir periodically until cool; 
remove from the ice bath. Place plastic wrap directly 
on the surface of the curd; refrigerate at least 1 hour 
and up to 3 days. 
3. Place 11/2 cups chilled heavy cream in large mixing 
bowl; whisk until soft peaks form. Reserve 1/2 
cup lemon curd for sauce; add the remaining lemon 
curd to the whipped cream. Fold gently until well 
combined. 
4. Place 8 ring molds, 3 inches in diameter and 21/4 
inches high, on a baking sheet lined with parchment. 
Divide the mousse among the molds, filling 
each with about 3/4 cup. Place in the freezer on the 
sheet until firm, at least 4 hours. 
5. Drain the candied lemon zest; reserve the syrup. 
Whisk 1/3 cup syrup, reserved 1/2 cup lemon curd, 
and juice of 1 lemon in a small bowl. Place the frozen 
mousse on plates; let warm 4 to 5 minutes before 
removing the molds. Meanwhile, whisk the creme 
fraiche and remaining 2 tablespoons cream in a 
medium bowl until soft peaks form. Remove the 
molds, spoon lemon sauce around the mousse; top 
with creme fraiche. Garnish with candied zest; serve. 
candied lemon zest 

GARNISHES 8 SERVINGS 

Use the juice of these lemons for the mousse, and 
use some of the syrup for lemon sauce. Make this 
recipe a day before the mousse. 

4 lemons, well scrubbed 

2 cups sugar 

1 cup cool water 

1. Remove the zest from the lemons with a vegetable 
peeler, keeping the pieces long. Remove the 
white pith using a paring knife. Cut into a fine julienne 
using a very sharp knife. Place the julienned 
zest in a small bowl; cover with boiling water. Let 
stand 30 minutes; drain. 
2. Bring the sugar and the cool water to a boil in a 
small saucepan over medium-high heat. When the 
sugar is completely dissolved, add the julienned 
zest, reduce heat to medium low, and cook 10 minutes. 
Remove from heat, cover, and let stand 
overnight. Store the zest in the syrup in an airtight 
container in the refrigerator for up to 2 weeks. 
FROZEN DESSERTS 419 


malt ball bombe 

MAKES 6 BALLS 

Each ball, made in two half-moon metal molds, 
can easily serve two people. 

3 pints chocolate ice cream 
11/4 cups vanilla ice cream 
31/2 tablespoons malted milk powder 

1 pound semisweet chocolate, chopped 

1. Chill 12 metal half-moon molds (1/2-cup capacity) 
in the freezer. Beat the chocolate ice cream in the 
bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment 
until soft but still holding its shape, 1 to 
2 minutes; work in batches if necessary. Wearing 
rubber gloves, remove the molds one at a time from 
the freezer; fill them with chocolate ice cream, pushing 
down on the ice cream to prevent air pockets. 
Make the top even and smooth; return the filled 
molds immediately to freezer. Let the chocolate ice 
cream become firm, but not too hard to spoon out, 
about 1 hour. Remove the molds from the freezer 
one at a time; use a 1-ounce ice cream scoop or 
round tablespoon to scoop out ice cream from the 
center, leaving   border around the edges. Return 
the molds immediately to freezer. 
2. Soften the vanilla ice cream as above. Add the 
malted milk powder, and stir just to combine. Remove 
the molds from the freezer, and fill each center 
with malted vanilla ice cream, smoothing the 
top with an offset spatula. Return to the freezer, and 
chill until firm, 1 hour more. 
3. Working with 2 molds at a time, remove from the 
freezer; dip in warm water for a few seconds. Use 
your finger to gently slide the ice cream out of the 
molds. Match two halves, flat sides together; wrap 
in plastic wrap. Gently press the halves together; 
return to freezer. Repeat with the remaining molds. 
Let the balls harden, about 1 hour. 
4. Melt the chocolate in the top of a double boiler 
or a heatproof bowl over a pot of barely simmering 
water. When melted, remove from heat; stir the 
chocolate occasionally to let it cool, 8 to 10 minutes. 
Place a wire rack over a rimmed baking sheet; set 
aside. Remove 1 malt ball at a time from the freezer; 
dip in the melted chocolate. Using a spoon or small 
offset spatula, very quickly turn to coat the ball and 
lift it out of the chocolate. Place on a wire rack, and 
let excess chocolate drip off (chocolate will adhere 
to wire rack if allowed to sit too long). Gently transfer 
the malt ball bombe to a waxed-paper-lined tray; 
return to the freezer before the chocolate is completely 
set. Repeat the process with the remaining 
balls. If not serving immediately, wrap each ball in 
plastic wrap after it is completely frozen. Serve on 
plates with forks. 

banana split bombe 

SERVES 10 TO 12 

Each of this bombe's layers must freeze solid before 
the next is added. Don't rush the freezing 
time, or the layers will run together. 

Cooking spray 

2 pints chocolate ice cream 

3 medium bananas (about 11/4 pounds) 

2 teaspoons milk 

1/2 cup sugar 

1/2 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 

Hot Fudge Sauce (recipe follows), 

room temperature 

1 pint vanilla ice cream 

1 cup walnuts, coarsely chopped 

2 tablespoons cold water 

1. Place a circle of parchment in the bottom of an 
8 x   springform pan. Lightly coat the bottom 
of the pan with cooking spray to adhere the parchment; 
set aside. Put in freezer for 30 minutes. 
2. Beat 11/2 pints chocolate ice cream in the bowl of 
an electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment 
until soft but still holding its shape, 1 to 2 minutes. 
Using a small offset spatula or a spoon, spread the 
ice cream evenly on the bottom and up the sides of 
the springform pan. Work quickly, or the ice cream 
will not stay on the sides very long. If the ice cream 
starts to fall, return the ice cream-lined pan to the 
freezer for 10 minutes, and then finish lining. Transfer 
the ice cream-lined pan to the freezer until hardened, 
about 45 minutes. 
420 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


3. In the bowl of a food processor combine 2 bananas, 
milk, 1/4 cup sugar, and vanilla. Process 30 
seconds or until smooth, and add the remaining banana. 
Pulse until there are only small pieces of banana, 
about the size of peas. Transfer the mixture 
to a bowl, and set aside. 
4. Remove the pan from the freezer, and spread half, 
about 3/4 cup, of the banana mixture into the bottom 
of the chocolate ice cream-lined pan. Return to the 
freezer until hardened, about 2 hours. Cover the remaining 
banana mixture with plastic wrap, and refrigerate. 
When hardened, remove the pan from the 
freezer; ladle 1 cup room-temperature hot fudge 
sauce over the banana layer. Return to the freezer 
until hardened, about 15 minutes. Set aside the remaining 
fudge sauce to serve with the finished 
bombe, or store in a plastic container in the refrigerator 
for up to 1 week. 
5. Soften the vanilla ice cream as above. Remove 
the pan from the freezer, and add 1 cup softened 
vanilla ice cream, using a small offset spatula or 
spoon to spread it evenly. Return the pan to the 
freezer, and let the ice cream harden, about 1 hour. 
The remaining soft vanilla ice cream can be returned 
to its container and stored in the freezer; it 
will soften quickly when you need it again. 
6. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Spread the walnuts 
evenly on a baking pan, and toast them in the oven, 
about 7 minutes, until fragrant and lightly golden. 
Remove from the oven, and let cool. In a medium 
nonstick saute pan, combine the remaining 1/4 cup 
sugar and the cold water. Stir over medium-high 
heat until the sugar is dissolved; stop stirring, and 
let boil. The sugar will begin to caramelize in the 
pan; you can pick up the pan and slightly swirl 
the sugar to allow for even caramelizing. Let the 
caramel turn to a dark golden brown, about 5 minutes, 
and immediately add the nuts to the pan. Turn 
off the heat. Using a wooden spoon, stir the nuts 
in the caramel to coat them evenly. Transfer the nuts 
directly onto a Silpat baking mat, and spread them 
into an even layer. Let cool; break into small pieces. 
7. Remove the ice cream mold from the freezer, and 
sprinkle an even layer of nuts over the vanilla layer. 
Remove the banana mixture from the refrigerator, 
and spread the remaining 3/4 cup over the nuts. 
Quickly return the mold to the freezer, and let chill. 
When the banana layer has hardened, about 2 hours, 
resoften the remaining cup vanilla ice cream and 
spread it evenly with small offset spatula or spoon. 

8. When the vanilla ice cream has hardened, soften 
the remaining cup chocolate ice cream; remove the 
mold from the freezer. Add the final layer of chocolate 
ice cream, spreading it all the way to the edges 
and smoothing the top. If the chocolate ice cream 
extends above the inside rim of the mold, run your 
finger around the top of the inside of the rim to give 
a clean edge. Cover with plastic wrap, and place in 
freezer to chill, about 4 hours, or overnight. When 
ready to serve, remove the mold from the freezer, 
and dip it in very hot water for a few seconds. Unlatch 
the ring, and gently pull away from the bombe. 
Using a parchment bottom allows the bombe to 
slide off the pan base. Transfer the bombe to a cutting 
board. Using a sharp knife, slice the bombe into 
wedges, and serve with remaining fudge sauce. 
hot fudge sauce 

MAKES ABOUT 21/3 CUPS 

10 ounces bittersweet chocolate, chopped 

8 tablespoons (1 stick) unsalted butter 
1/2 cup plus 2 tablespoons granulated sugar 
1/2 cup water 


Pinch of salt 
1/2 cup light corn syrup 


1. In a medium saucepan over medium-high heat, 
combine the chocolate, butter, sugar, water, and salt. 
Stir continuously until melted and combined. Add 
the corn syrup, and bring the mixture to a boil. 
2. Reduce heat, and simmer on low, stirring occasionally, 
until thickened, about 10 minutes. Remove 
from heat, and cool to room temperature. 
FROZEN DESSERTS 421 


sweet corn ice cream 

MAKES 11/2 QUARTS 

4 ears fresh sweet corn, shucked 
2 cups milk 
2 cups heavy cream 


3/4 cup sugar 
9 large egg yolks 
Blackberries, for garnish 


1. Using a large knife, slice the kernels from the 
cobs; place in a large saucepan. Cut or break the 
cobs into thirds; add to the pot with the milk, cream, 
and 1/2 cup sugar. Bring the mixture to a boil, stirring; 
turn off heat. Remove the cobs, and discard. 
Using an immersion blender or a blender, puree 
mixture. Infuse for 1 hour by covering the pan with 
a tight-fitting lid. 
2. Uncover, bring to a simmer, and turn off heat. In 
a small bowl, whisk the egg yolks and remaining 
1/4 cup sugar. Add 1 cup hot cream to the yolks, stirring 
constantly so they do not curdle. Add the yolk 
mixture to the saucepan, stirring. Cook over 
medium-low heat, stirring constantly, until thick 
enough to coat the spoon, about 10 minutes. 
3. Pass the custard through a coarse sieve, then 
through a fine sieve or chinois, pressing down on 
the solids; discard the solids. Let the custard cool. 
Cover; chill at least 4 hours. Freeze in an ice-cream 
maker according to the manufacturer's directions. 
Serve garnished with blackberries. 
key lime ice cream 

MAKES ABOUT 11/2 QUARTS 

8 Key limes or 5 regular limes 
2 cups milk 
6 large egg yolks 


3/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons sugar 
2 cups very cold heavy cream 
1. Grate the lime zest; reserve. Squeeze the limes to 
yield 1/2 cup juice. Place the zest in a saucepan with 
the milk. Scald the mixture; cover. Remove from 
heat. Steep for 30 minutes. 
2. Combine the egg yolks and sugar in a bowl; 
whisk until pale yellow and thick. 
3. Fill a large bowl with ice and water; set aside. Return 
the milk to the stove, and bring to a simmer. 
Slowly pour the milk mixture into the egg yolk mixture, 
whisking constantly. 
4. Return the mixture to the saucepan; cook over 
low heat, stirring constantly with a wooden spoon, 
until the mixture is thick enough to coat the back 
of a spoon, about 5 minutes. 
5. Remove the pan from the heat; stir in the chilled 
cream to stop the cooking. Pour through a fine-
mesh sieve into a bowl set in an ice-water bath; stir 
occasionally until cooled. Stir the reserved lime 
juice into the custard. Cover; chill at least 30 minutes 
or overnight. 
6. Pour the custard into an ice-cream maker, following 
the manufacturer's instructions. Churn until 
the ice cream is just set, but not hard. Transfer to 
an airtight container; freeze at least 4 hours and up 
to 1 week. 
watermelon ice 

MAKES 5 CUPS 

1 4-pound wedge watermelon 
1/2 cup superfine sugar 
1/4 cup fresh lime juice 


2 tablespoons Campari 

1. Remove the rind from the watermelon, cut the 
flesh into   chunks, and remove the seeds. 
Arrange in a single layer on a parchment-lined baking 
sheet or in a resealable plastic bag; place in 
freezer until frozen, about 11/2 hours. (Transfer to airtight 
freezer bags if not using immediately.) 
2. Place the frozen chunks in a food processor; 
process until smooth. Add the sugar, lime juice, and 
Campari; process until fully incorporated, about 5 
minutes, scraping down as necessary. Freeze in an 
airtight container, at least 2 hours, until firm. Stir 
if the juice starts to separate from ice. 
422 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


cantaloupe granita 

SERVES 4 

Look for the ripest melon you can find; it should 
have a sweet fragrance and a firm exterior that 
yields slightly at the stem end. Granita can be 
stored in an airtight container in the freezer for 
up to 2 weeks. We like to serve the granita over 
wedges of cantaloupe for added melon flavor. 

1 cantaloupe (about 3 pounds) 

1/4 cup sugar 

2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 

2 tablespoons water 

1. Using a sharp knife, cut the melon in half lengthwise. 
Remove the seeds with a spoon, and discard. 
Slice off and discard the skin and pale green flesh. 
Cut the melon into large chunks. 
2. Place in the bowl of a food processor fitted with 
the metal blade, and puree until smooth. Transfer 
to a nonreactive stainless-steel bowl, and set aside. 
3. Combine the sugar, lemon juice, and the water in 
a small saucepan. Cook over medium heat until the 
mixture has thickened slightly. Remove from heat; 
let cool completely. 
4. Stir the sugar syrup into the melon puree; place 
in the freezer, uncovered, until the mixture is 
chunky, about 11/2 hours, whisking every 20 minutes 
to keep it from becoming too solid. To serve, divide 
among 4 shallow bowls. 
concord grape sorbet 

SERVES 10 TO 12 

This sorbet gets its intense purple hue from Concord 
grapes, which have a deep blue-black skin. 
The longer you process it in the ice-cream maker, 
the lighter and fluffier your final product will be. 
Sugar cones are ideal containers for serving the 
sorbet al fresco. 

11/2 pounds Concord grapes (1-quart 
container) 

1/4 cup water 

2/3 cup Simple Syrup (page 660) 
11/2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 

1. Prepare an ice-water bath; set aside. Combine the 
grapes and the water in a medium saucepan. Cook 
over medium-high heat until the liquid begins to 
bubble and the grapes start releasing liquid, about 
4 minutes. Reduce heat, and simmer until the juices 
are dark purple and the grapes begin to break apart, 
about 3 minutes. 
2. Pass the mixture through a food mill and then 
through a fine sieve into a large bowl set in the ice 
bath; stir frequently until completely cool. Stir in 
the simple syrup and lemon juice. 
3. Transfer the mixture to an ice-cream maker, and 
freeze according to manufacturer's instructions. 
Transfer to an airtight container, and store in the 
freezer until ready to serve, up to 2 weeks. 
coffee ice cream affogato 

SERVES 4 

The word affogato means "drowned" in Italian; 
affogato al caffe is the name of a popular dessert 
in which hot espresso is poured over gelato just 
before it is eaten. The bitterness of the espresso 
acts as a pleasant counterpoint to the sweet 
creaminess of the ice cream. Liqueur intensifies 
the overall flavor. If you prefer, substitute very 
strong brewed coffee for the espresso. 

1 pint best-quality coffee ice cream 
or gelato 


4 ounces liqueur, such as sambuca, 
amaretto, or Frangelico (optional) 


4 demitasse cups freshly brewed espresso 

Scoop the ice cream into 4 small 
bowls or large coffee cups. Divide the liqueur 
among 4 small glasses, if using; serve the liqueur 
and espresso alongside each bowl, and let each person 
pour them over the ice cream. 

FROZEN DESSERTS 423 


blackberry ice cream 

MAKES ABOUT 2 QUARTS 

Wild raspberries, huckleberries, or boysenberries 
can be used in place of blackberries, if you prefer. 
Drizzle leftover blackberry puree on top for 
added flavor. 

4 cups fresh blackberries 
11/3 cups sugar 

1/2 cup water 

1 vanilla bean, split lengthwise 
and scraped 


2 cups milk 

6 large egg yolks 

2 cups heavy cream 

1. Combine 3 cups blackberries with 1 cup sugar 
and the water in a medium nonreactive saucepan. 
Bring to a boil over medium heat. Reduce heat to a 
simmer, and cook, stirring constantly, until the 
sugar dissolves and the berries begin to fall apart, 
about 4 minutes. 
2. Remove from the heat. Pass the berry mixture 
through a fine sieve into a medium bowl, gently 
pressing down on the solids with a wooden spoon 
to release as much liquid as possible. Measure out 
1/2 cup solids, and set aside; discard the remaining 
solids. Measure out 13/4 cups strained puree, 
and return it to the saucepan; reserve any remaining 
puree for serving. (Store reserved puree 
in an airtight container in the refrigerator until 
readytouse.) 
3. Place the vanilla bean and scrapings in a 
saucepan, and add the milk. Bring to a gentle boil 
over medium heat, and remove from heat. Discard 
the vanilla pod. 
4. Prepare an ice-water bath, and set aside. Combine 
the egg yolks and the remaining 1/3 cup sugar 
in the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the whisk 
attachment. Beat on medium-high speed until the 
mixture is pale yellow, 3 to 5 minutes. 
5. Using a measuring cup or ladle, slowly pour 
about 1/2 cup hot milk mixture into the egg yolk mixture, 
beating constantly on low speed until blended. 
Continue adding the milk mixture, about 1/2 cup at 
a time, beating until thoroughly combined after 
each addition. 
6. Return the mixture to the saucepan. Cook over 
medium heat, stirring constantly with a wooden 
spoon, until it is thick enough to coat the back of 
the spoon and hold a line drawn across the back of 
the spoon with your finger, 6 to 8 minutes. 
7. Remove from heat; add the reserved strained 
puree, and immediately stir in the cream to stop the 
cooking. Pour through a fine sieve into a medium 
bowl set in the ice bath; let cool completely, stirring 
occasionally. Cover the bowl with plastic wrap, and 
place in the refrigerator until thoroughly chilled, at 
least 30 minutes or overnight. 
8. Freeze the mixture in an ice-cream maker according 
to the manufacturer's instructions; it should 
still be slightly soft. Stir in the reserved 1/2 cup blackberry 
solids and remaining 1 cup blackberries; spin 
a few times in the ice-cream maker to distribute 
evenly. Transfer the mixture to an airtight container, 
and place in the freezer until the ice cream is completely 
set, at least 4 hours and up to 1 week. 
mango-lime granita 

SERVES 4 

Fresh mangoes are loaded with vitamins A and C. 
Whisking the granita as it freezes ensures that it 
reaches the proper consistency. 

3 cups chopped ripe mango 
(about 3 mangoes) 


1 cup water 

Juice of 2 limes (about 1/4 cup) 
2 tablespoons sugar 


1. Place the chopped mango in the bowl of a food 
processor fitted with the metal blade, and process 
until smooth. Transfer to a medium bowl. Add the 
water, lime juice, and sugar, and stir to dissolve. 
2. Pour the mixture into a 9 x   deep-sided 
metal pan, and place in the freezer until nearly set, 
424 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


about 3 hours, whisking the mixture every hour. Remove 
from the freezer, and scrape the surface with 
the tines of a fork until it is the texture of shaved 
ice. Return to the freezer until ready to serve. The 
granita can be stored in an airtight container in the 
freezer up to 2 weeks. 

FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 108 CALORIES, 0 G FAT, 
0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 28 G CARBOHYDRATE, 4 MG SODIUM, 
1 G PROTEIN, 1 G FIBER 

espresso granita 

MAKES ABOUT 3/4 QUART 

You can substitute espresso in this recipe with 2 
cups very strong brewed coffee, although the flavor 
will not be as intense. 

1/4 cup ground espresso 
2 cups very hot water 
1 cup Simple Syrup (page 660) 


1. Place the espresso in a medium heatproof bowl, 
and pour the hot water over it. Let stand to extract 
as much flavor as possible without becoming bitter, 
about 30 minutes. The brew should be very 
strong; it will be diluted with the simple syrup. 
2. Strain through a fine-mesh sieve into a deep-
sided 9 x 1  metal baking pan, and discard the 
espresso grounds. Add the simple syrup, and stir 
until well combined. Place in the freezer, uncovered, 
until the mixture is nearly set, at least 4 hours, 
whisking it every hour. 
3. Remove the mixture from the freezer, and scrape 
the surface with the tines of a fork until it is the texture 
of shaved ice. (If necessary, the mixture can be 
frozen overnight without whisking; remove it from 
freezer in the morning, and let sit at room temperature 
about 10 minutes to allow it to soften before 
scraping.) Serve. 
frozen chocolate malted 

MAKES TWO 11/2-CUP SERVINGS 

This dessert was inspired by the Frozen Hot 
Chocolate at Serendipity, a restaurant in New 
York City. 

11/4 cups heavy cream 

1/4 cup milk 
7 tablespoons sugar 


6 tablespoons cocoa powder 
1 tablespoon malted milk powder 


3 cups ice cubes 

Chocolate shavings, for garnish 
(optional) 


1. Whip 1/2 cup cream, and set aside. 
2. Place the milk, remaining 3/4 cup cream, sugar, 
cocoa, and malted milk powder in the jar of a 
blender, and blend until smooth and frothy. 
3. With the motor running, add the ice cubes, a few 
at a time, until the mixture is thick and smooth. 
Pour the mixture into tall glasses, and top with the 
whipped cream and chocolate shavings, if desired. 
cherry ice 

SERVES 4 

1/2 cup dry white wine 
1/3 cup honey 


2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 

2 cups pitted cherries, fresh or frozen, 
plus whole ones for garnish 


1. In a medium bowl, whisk together the wine, 
honey, and lemon juice until combined. Set aside. 
2. Place the cherries in a food processor; pulse until 
finely chopped. Transfer to the bowl with the liquid 
mixture; stir until combined. Pour into a shallow 
metal pan and place in the freezer. Stir with a fork 
every 10 minutes until the mixture is slushy and 
partially solidified, about 35 minutes. Spoon into 
serving cups; garnish with whole cherries. 
FROZEN DESSERTS 425 


chocolate gelato 

MAKES 11/2 QUARTS 

Use the highest-quality chocolate you can find. 

3 cups whole milk 

11/2 cups heavy cream 
1/3 cup unsweetened cocoa powder 

8 large egg yolks 
1/3 cup sugar 


6 ounces bittersweet chocolate, 
finely chopped 


1. Prepare an ice-water bath, and set aside. In a large 
saucepan, bring the milk, cream, and cocoa to a simmer 
over medium-low heat. Combine the egg yolks 
and sugar in the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with 
the whisk attachment, and beat on medium speed 
until pale yellow and very thick, 3 to 5 minutes. 
2. Add half the milk mixture to the yolk mixture, 
and whisk until blended. Stir the combined mixture 
back into the remaining milk mixture. Add the 
chocolate, and cook over low heat, stirring constantly, 
until the mixture is thick enough to coat the 
back of a spoon. 
3. Pass the mixture through a very fine sieve into 
a large mixing bowl. Set the bowl in the ice bath, 
and chill completely. Freeze in an ice-cream maker 
according to the manufacturer's instructions until 
the gelato just holds its shape. Transfer to a metal 
loaf pan, cover with plastic wrap, and freeze until 
firm, at least 2 hours. 
pear stracciatella ice cream 

MAKES 2 QUARTS 

In Italian gelato shops, stracciatella describes an 
ice cream that has chocolate mixed into it-as our 
recipe does. 

41/4 cups sugar 

1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice 
1 vanilla bean, halved lengthwise 


5 Anjou or Bartlett pears, peeled 
3 large egg yolks 


Pinch of salt 
1 cup milk 


1 cup heavy cream 
1 tablespoon Poire William (pear 
brandy; optional) 
1/4 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 


6 ounces bittersweet chocolate (preferably 
70 percent cacao), melted and cooled 


Chocolate Syrup (recipe follows) 

1. Put 4 cups water, 4 cups sugar, and the lemon 
juice in a large saucepan. Scrape in the vanilla seeds, 
then add the bean. Bring the mixture to a boil. 
2. Reduce the heat to medium. Add the pears to the 
pan. Cover the surface of liquid with a sheet of 
parchment paper. Cook the pears until very tender, 
15 to 25 minutes (time will vary depending on the 
ripeness of the pears). Remove from heat. Let the 
pears cool completely in the poaching liquid. 
Gelato means "frozen" in Italian, 
and, in a way, the translation 
is apt for a dessert whose 
flavors remain so true to their 
original sources. Gelato differs 
from what we think of as ice 
cream in a few ways, its delicate 
taste among them. Small bits of 
chocolate or nuts occasionally 
make an appearance, but more 
often the dessert is smooth and 
simple, its flavors derived from 

ABOUT GELATO 

a careful infusion of natural flavors. 
Steeping the ingredients in 
warm milk for at least 30 minutes 
gives the dessert its purer, 
more intense taste, so pistachio 
tastes exactly like pistachios, 
mango like mangoes, and so on. 

Gelato also has less butterfat 
than American ice creams; 
whereas ice cream is made from 
cream, gelato is traditionally 
made with egg yolks and milk. 

(Another frozen dessert called 
gelato alla crema is made 
with egg yolks and cream, but 
this is not what is usually sold 
as simple gelato.) This, along 
with the increased amount of air 
pumped into the mixture during 
churning, makes for a much 
lighter, more velvety dessert 
than rich, dense American-
style ice creams. 

426 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


3. Transfer the pears to a cutting board. Discard 
all but 1/4 cup poaching liquid. Halve and core the 
pears. Puree 3 pears in a food processor. Finely chop 
the remaining 2 pears. 
4. Whisk the yolks, remaining 1/4 cup sugar, and the 
salt in a medium bowl; set aside. 
5. Heat the milk and cream in a medium saucepan 
over medium-high heat until the mixture is steaming 
and small bubbles form on the edges. Add to 
the yolk mixture; whisk until combined. Pour the 
mixture back into the pan; cook over low heat, stirring 
constantly with a wooden spoon, until thick 
enough to coat the spoon, about 5 minutes. 
6. Pour the custard through a fine sieve into a large 
bowl set in an ice-water bath. Let cool, stirring 
occasionally. 
7. Stir the pear puree, reserved poaching liquid, 
brandy (if desired), and vanilla extract into the custard. 
Freeze in an ice-cream maker according to the 
manufacturer's instructions. 
8. When the mixture is frozen but still being 
churned, add the chopped pear. Pour in the melted 
chocolate in a slow, steady stream; mix until combined. 
Freeze in an airtight container up to 2 days. 
Serve with the chocolate syrup. 
NOTE The yolks in this dish are not fully cooked; it 
should not be prepared for pregnant women, babies, 
young children, the elderly, or anyone whose health 
is compromised. 

chocolate syrup 

MAKES 22/3 CUPS 

1 cup heavy cream 
1/2 cup light corn syrup 


12 ounces bittersweet chocolate (preferably 
70 percent cacao), chopped 


2 tablespoons Poire William (pear brandy; 
optional) 


1. Heat the cream and corn syrup in a medium 
saucepan over medium heat, stirring, until the mixture 
is combined. Add the chocolate; stir until 
smooth. Remove from heat. 
2. Stir in the brandy, if desired. Let the sauce cool until 
thick but pourable. Just before serving, whisk until 
smooth. The syrup can be refrigerated, in an airtight 
container, up to 1 week. Reheat before serving. 
rose water sherbet 

MAKES 21/2 CUPS 

1/4 cup sugar 
21/4 cups buttermilk 

1/2 cup corn syrup 

1 teaspoon rose water, plus more for 
garnish 


Roasted pistachios, coarsely chopped 

Edible geranium petals (optional) 

1. In a small saucepan over medium heat, dissolve 
the sugar in 1/4 cup buttermilk. Pour into a bowl with 
the remaining 2 cups buttermilk. Stir in the corn 
syrup and rose water. 
2. Freeze in an ice-cream maker according to the 
manufacturer's instructions. Transfer to a loaf pan; 
cover with plastic wrap, and freeze at least 1 hour 
and up to 1 week. 
3. To serve, scoop the sherbet into bowls; garnish 
with a few drops of rose water, chopped pistachios, 
and flower petals. 
coconut ice milk 

MAKES 11/2 QUARTS 

Freshly shaved coconut makes a lovely garnish; 
you could also sprinkle some shredded packaged 
coconut over the top. 

2 cups unsweetened coconut milk 

2 cups half-and-half 

1 cup sugar 

In a large bowl, whisk together the ingredients. 
Freeze in an ice-cream maker according to the manufacturer's 
instructions. Transfer to airtight containers, 
and store in the freezer up to 10 days. 

FROZEN DESSERTS 427 


brownie ice cream bars 

MAKES 1 DOZEN 

13/4 sticks (14 tablespoons) unsalted butter 

46 ounces semisweet chocolate, cut 
into   pieces 


3 large eggs, lightly beaten 

1/2 teaspoon salt 
1 cup granulated sugar 


1/2 cup packed light-brown sugar 
1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 


3/4 cup all-purpose flour 
2 quarts vanilla ice cream 
1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Line a 9 x 1  baking 
dish with parchment paper; set aside. Melt 11/2 
sticks butter and 6 ounces chocolate in a heatproof 
bowl set over a pan of simmering water, stirring; set 
aside. 
2. Whisk together the eggs, salt, sugars, and vanilla 
in a large bowl. Stir in the chocolate mixture; fold 
in the flour. Pour the batter into the lined baking 
dish. Bake until the top is shiny, about 20 minutes. 
Let cool in the dish on a wire rack. Cover; let stand 
8 hours (or overnight). 
3. Run a thin knife around the edges of the brownie; 
invert to unmold onto a cutting board. Remove the 
parchment. Trim 1/4 inch from the edges of the 
brownie. Line the baking dish with a clean sheet 
of parchment paper, leaving a   overhang on 
the long sides. Return the brownie to the dish, top 
side up; set aside. 
4. Mix half the ice cream in the bowl of an electric 
mixer fitted with the paddle attachment until 
smooth but not melted; spread over the brownie. 
Cover; freeze 1 hour. 
5. Mix the remaining ice cream, and spread over 
the frozen layer of ice cream on the brownie. Cover; 
freeze 1 hour (or overnight). 
6. Melt the remaining 40 ounces chocolate with the 
remaining 2 tablespoons butter. Let cool. 
7. Transfer the brownie to a cutting board. Dip a 
knife in hot water; wipe dry. Trim 1/4 inch from the 
edges. Cut the brownie into 12 bars, dipping the 
knife as needed. Transfer to a wire rack set over a 
baking sheet. Ladle the chocolate mixture over the 
bars. Freeze 30 minutes. 

ultimate malted brownie sundae 

SERVES 8 

2 pints vanilla ice cream, softened 

3/4 cup (about 3 ounces) malted milk powder 
1/2 cup malt balls, coarsely crushed, plus 
more for garnish 


Malted Brownies (recipe follows) 
Chocolate Sauce (recipe follows) 


1. In the bowl of an electric mixer, combine the ice 
cream, malted milk powder, and crushed malt balls. 
Mix until blended, about 1 minute. Transfer the mixture 
to an airtight container, and freeze until firm, 
about 4 hours, or overnight. 
2. Just before serving, cut the brownies into 24 rectangles, 
making 4 even columns and 6 even rows. 
3. Assemble the sundaes: Divide half of the ice 
cream evenly among 8 serving dishes. Top each 
with a brownie, then with another ice cream layer. 
Garnish each with 2 more brownies. Drizzle with 
chocolate sauce; sprinkle with crushed malt balls. 
malted brownies 

MAKES ABOUT 2 DOZEN 

1 cup (2 sticks) unsalted butter, cut into 
small pieces, plus more for the pan 


1 cup all-purpose flour, plus more 
for the pan 


10 ounces semisweet chocolate, 
coarsely chopped 


1 cup (about 41/2 ounces) malted milk powder 

1 cup (about 4 ounces) malt balls, 
coarsely crushed 


11/2 cups packed light-brown sugar 
3 large eggs 

1 tablespoon pure vanilla extract 

428 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Butter and lightly flour 
a 9 x 1  baking pan; set aside. Combine the 
chocolate and butter in a heatproof bowl set over 
simmering water; stir until melted and smooth. Set 
aside to cool slightly, about 5 minutes. 
2. In a medium bowl, whisk together the flour, 
malted milk powder, and malt balls; set aside. In the 
bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the whisk attachment, 
beat the sugar and eggs until thickened 
and fluffy, about 2 minutes. Add the melted chocolate 
mixture and the vanilla; mix to combine, about 
30 seconds more. Using a spatula, fold in the flour 
mixture until just combined. 
3. Pour the batter into the prepared pan, spreading 
it evenly with a rubber spatula. Bake until a cake 
tester inserted in the center comes out with just a 
few crumbs on it, 30 to 35 minutes. Transfer the 
brownies to a wire rack to cool. 
chocolate sauce 

MAKES 2 CUPS 

Extra sauce may be refrigerated in an airtight 
container for up to 2 weeks. 

1 can (14 ounces) sweetened condensed milk 

2 ounces unsweetened chocolate, 
coarsely chopped 


2 ounces semisweet chocolate, 
coarsely chopped 


3/4 cup heavy cream 
In a small saucepan, combine all the ingredients. 
Warm gently over medium heat, stirring constantly, 
until the chocolate is completely melted and the 
sauce is smooth. Allow the sauce to cool slightly 
before serving. 

profiteroles with chocolate- 
macadamia semifreddo 


MAKES ABOUT 20 

Profiteroles, like eclairs, are made from pate a 
choux, a delicate, airy pastry that is surprisingly 
easy to make. 

4 tablespoons unsalted butter 

1/2 teaspoon sugar 
1/4 teaspoon salt 


1/2 cup all-purpose flour 

2 large eggs, plus 1 large egg 
white, if needed 


Chocolate-Macadamia Semifreddo 
(recipe follows) 


Simple Chocolate Sauce (recipe follows) 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Line a baking sheet 
with parchment paper; set aside. Bring the butter, 
sugar, salt, and 1/2 cup water to a boil in a small 
saucepan over medium-high heat. Remove from 
heat; stir in the flour. Return to medium-high heat; 
stir with a wooden spoon until the batter pulls away 
from the sides of the pan, about 4 minutes. 
2. Transfer the batter to the bowl of an electric 
mixer fitted with the paddle attachment. Mix on low 
speed until slightly cooled, about 2 minutes. With 
the mixer on medium speed, add the eggs one at a 
time, mixing well after each addition. Test the batter 
for doneness by dabbing it with your finger; as 
you pull away, a sticky thread should form. If not, 
add the egg white, 1 teaspoon at a time. 
3. Fit a pastry bag with a   round tip, and fill 
with batter. Pipe 1 -diameter rounds 2 inches 
apart on the lined sheet. Gently smooth the peaked 
tops with a moistened fingertip. 
4. Bake until golden brown, 28 to 30 minutes. Let 
cool completely on a wire rack. If not using immediately, 
store at room temperature in an airtight 
container up to 3 days, or freeze up to 1 month. 
5. To assemble the profiteroles, halve them horizontally, 
and fill with a 11/2-ounce scoop (3 tablespoons) 
semifreddo. Top the profiteroles with 
chocolate sauce. 
FROZEN DESSERTS 429 


chocolate-macadamia semifreddo 

MAKES 5 CUPS 

2/3 cup salted macadamia nuts 

4 ounces bittersweet chocolate, 
coarsely chopped 


2/3 cup sugar 
11/3 cups heavy cream 

3 large egg whites 

1/4 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Toast the nuts on a 
baking sheet until pale golden brown, about 10 minutes. 
Let cool completely. 
2. Pulse the nuts and chocolate in a food processor 
until coarsely ground. Add 1/3 cup sugar; pulse until 
combined, about 7 times (do not overprocess; mixture 
should not form a paste). Set aside. 
3. Beat the cream in the bowl of an electric mixer 
fitted with the whisk attachment until stiff peaks 
form. Transfer to a large bowl; cover with plastic 
wrap, and refrigerate. Meanwhile, beat the egg 
whites in the clean bowl of an electric mixer fitted 
with the whisk attachment until soft peaks form. 
Add the vanilla and remaining 1/3 cup sugar; beat 
until stiff peaks form. 
4. Fold the egg whites into the whipped cream; gently 
fold in the nut mixture. Spoon into a glass baking 
dish; smooth with a rubber spatula. Press plastic 
wrap on the surface; freeze at least 4 hours, and up 
to 1 week. 
NOTE: Raw eggs should not be used in food prepared 
for pregnant women, babies, young children, the elderly, 
or anyone whose health is compromised. 

simple chocolate sauce 

MAKES ABOUT 1 CUP 

5 ounces bittersweet chocolate, melted 

1/4 cup light corn syrup 

Whisk chocolate, corn syrup, and 1/4 cup hot water 
in a small bowl until smooth. If not using the sauce 
immediately, refrigerate, covered, up to 3 days; 
bring to room temperature before using. 

ice cream sandwiches 

MAKES 1 DOZEN 

2 pints coffee or dulce de leche ice cream 

Molasses-Ginger Cookies (recipe follows) 
or Chocolate Cookies (recipe follows) 

Using a 1/4-cup-capacity ice cream scoop, place a 
ball of ice cream on an upside-down cookie. Top 
with a second cookie, right side up. Press the cookies 
together until the ice cream reaches the edges. 
Repeat with the remaining cookies. Freeze until 
firm, at least 30 minutes. To store, wrap in plastic. 

molasses-ginger cookies 

MAKES 2 DOZEN 

11/2 cups all-purpose flour 

1 teaspoon baking soda 
1/4 teaspoon baking powder 


2 teaspoons ground ginger 
1/2 teaspoon ground cinnamon 


1/4 teaspoon ground cloves 
Pinch of freshly ground white pepper 


1/4 teaspoon salt 

1/2 cup (1 stick) unsalted butter, 
room temperature 


3/4 cup firmly packed light-brown sugar 
1/4 cup plus 1 tablespoon molasses 
1 large egg, room temperature 
1/2 cup granulated sugar, for rolling 


1. Line 2 baking sheets with parchment paper. Into 
a medium bowl, sift together the flour, baking soda, 
baking powder, ginger, cinnamon, cloves, pepper, 
and salt. 
2. In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the 
paddle attachment, beat the butter, brown sugar, 
and molasses until light and fluffy. Beat in the egg 
until smooth. Add the flour mixture; beat until combined. 
Wrap the dough in plastic, flattened into a 
disk. Chill until firm, about 1 hour or overnight. 
430 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


3. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Make 1  balls of 
dough; roll each in sugar. Place them 2 inches apart 
on the prepared baking sheets. Chill 20 minutes. 
4. Bake the cookies, rotating baking sheets halfway 
through, until firm around the edges and slightly 
soft in the center, 12 to 14 minutes. Let cool on a 
wire rack. Store in an airtight container up to 3 days. 
chocolate cookies 

MAKES 2 DOZEN 

1 cup plus 2 tablespoons all-purpose flour 

2/3 cup unsweetened cocoa powder 

1 teaspoon baking soda 

1/4 teaspoon baking powder 

1/4 teaspoon salt 
11/4 cups sugar, plus more for coating 

2 tablespoons corn syrup 

3/4 cup (11/2 sticks) unsalted butter, 
room temperature 
1 large egg, room temperature 

1. Line 2 baking sheets with parchment paper; set 
aside. Into a medium bowl, sift the flour, cocoa, baking 
soda, baking powder, and salt; set aside. 
2. In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the 
paddle attachment, beat the sugar, corn syrup, and 
butter until light and fluffy, about 2 minutes. Add 
the egg, and beat to combine. Slowly add the flour 
mixture; beat until combined. 
3. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Pour enough sugar for 
coating the cookies into a small, shallow bowl. Make 
1  balls of dough, and roll each in sugar until 
completely coated. Place the balls of dough 2 inches 
apart on the prepared baking sheets. Refrigerate 
20 minutes. 
4. Bake the cookies, rotating the baking sheets 
halfway through, until firm around the edges but 
still slightly soft in the center, 12 to 14 minutes. 
Transfer to a wire rack to cool completely. 
coconut-mango ice pops 

MAKES 14 

3 large mangoes, coarsely chopped 

1 can (14 ounces) light coconut milk 

1/4 cup sugar 

1/4 cup plus 1 tablespoon fresh lime juice 

Pinch of salt 

Puree the mango, coconut milk, sugar, lime juice, 
and salt in a food processor. Pour into 21/2-ounce ice-
pop molds. Freeze until firm, about 4 hours. 

white peach and bay leaf sorbet 

MAKES 4 CUPS; SERVES 8 

11/4 pounds white peaches (about 31/2 
peaches), quartered and pitted 

2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 

2 cups Herb Syrup with bay leaves 
(recipe follows) 


1. Process peaches and 2 tablespoons water in a food 
processor until smooth, about 2 minutes. Transfer 
to a large bowl. Stir in lemon juice and syrup. 
2. Pour the mixture through a fine sieve into another 
large bowl; discard the solids. Freeze in an ice-
cream maker according to the manufacturer's 
instructions. Transfer the sorbet to an airtight container; 
freeze until firm, about 4 hours. 
herb syrup 

MAKES 2 CUPS 

11/4 cups sugar 

2 fresh bay leaves or 1 ounce fresh 
tarragon, fresh mint, fresh lemon verbena, 
or fresh lemongrass 


Stir together the sugar and 11/4 cups water in a small 
saucepan. Bring to a boil over medium-high heat, 
stirring constantly, until the sugar has dissolved. 
Add the herbs; remove from heat. Let cool completely. 
Refrigerate in an airtight container at least 
8 hours, or up to 1 day. Before using, pour through 
a fine sieve into a bowl; discard the herbs. 

FROZEN DESSERTS 431 


cherry sherbet in tuile bowls 

MAKES 1 QUART; SERVES 6 

This easy sherbet has the rich, creamy texture of 
ice cream; it's best eaten within a day or two of 
being made. An ice-cream maker is unnecessary, 
but if you prefer to use one, just follow the manufacturer's 
instructions. 

1 cup sugar 

2/3 cup creme fraiche 
11/2 cups heavy cream 

1/4 cup whole milk 

1/2 teaspoon salt 

1 pound sweet cherries (preferably Bing), 
pitted and halved 


2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 

Tuile Bowls (recipe follows) 

1. Prepare an ice-water bath; set aside. Stir together 
2/3 cup sugar and 2/3 cup water in a small saucepan. 
Bring to a boil, stirring occasionally. Transfer the 
syrup immediately to a medium bowl. Place the 
bowl in the ice-water bath, being careful not to let 
the water reach the rim of the bowl. Let the syrup 
cool completely, stirring frequently. 
2. Whisk together the creme fraiche, heavy cream, 
milk, salt, and syrup in a large bowl. Transfer to the 
freezer; let set, whisking mixture vigorously for 2 
minutes every 30 minutes, until the sherbet is the 
consistency of whipped cream and the whisk leaves 
a trail, 3 to 4 hours. 
3. Meanwhile, put the cherries, remaining 1/3 cup 
sugar, and lemon juice in a large skillet. Cook over 
medium-high heat, stirring occasionally, until the 
cherries begin to break down and the juice has 
thickened, about 10 minutes. Transfer to a medium 
bowl. Let the mixture stand at room temperature 
until it has cooled completely. 
4. Gently fold the cherry mixture into the sherbet 
until just combined (the juices should leave streaks). 
Cover the surface of the sherbet with parchment 
paper and freeze in the bowl until set, 4 to 8 hours. 
5. If making a day ahead, transfer the sherbet to 
an airtight container, and place a piece of parchment 
paper directly onto the surface of the sherbet. 
Cover tightly. Before serving, let stand at room temperature 
until slightly softened, about 5 minutes. 
Scoop the sherbet into tuile bowls, and serve. 
tuile bowls 

MAKES 6 

The tuile batter can be made 1 day in advance. 
Refrigerate it in an airtight container until you're 
ready to bake. 

1 stick (8 tablespoons) unsalted 
butter, softened 


2/3 cup packed light-brown sugar 

4 large egg whites, room temperature 
1 cup all-purpose flour 


Pinch of salt 
1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F, with a rack in the middle. 
Put the butter and brown sugar in the bowl of 
an electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment. 
Mix on medium speed until fluffy, 2 to 3 minutes. 
Mix in the egg whites, one at a time. Mix in the flour, 
salt, and vanilla. 
2. Line a baking sheet with a Silpat baking mat or 
parchment paper. Spoon 2 tablespoons batter onto 
the baking mat. Using an offset spatula, spread the 
batter into a 7-inch circle, with the edges slightly 
thicker than the center. Repeat, making a second 
circle on the mat. 
3. Bake, rotating the sheet halfway through, until 
the edges of the cookies turn golden, about 9 minutes. 
Using a small spatula, immediately transfer 1 
cookie to a small bowl (about 51/2 inches in diameter 
and 3 inches deep). Gently mold the warm 
cookie to the shape of the bowl, pressing the bottom 
down to flatten. Let stand in the bowl 30 seconds; 
remove. Repeat with the remaining cookie. If 
the cookies become too cool to shape, return them 
to oven for 20 seconds. Repeat, baking the remaining 
batter and forming it into bowls. If using just 1 
baking sheet, let it cool before spreading the next 
batch of batter onto it. 
432 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


frozen espresso cheesecake 

MAKES ONE 10 x   CAKE; SERVES 10 

11/2 cups finely ground chocolate wafer 
cookies (8 ounces; about 35 cookies) 

4 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted 

1/2 cup plus 2 tablespoons sugar 

4 large egg yolks, room temperature 

41/2 teaspoons good-quality instant espresso 
powder (such as Medaglia d'Oro) 

Pinch of salt 

11/2 pounds mascarpone cheese, room 
temperature 

11/2 teaspoons pure vanilla extract 

12 ounces hard torrone (Italian nougat), 
cut into   pieces 


1/2 cup heavy cream, chilled 

1. Stir together the cookie crumbs, melted butter, 
and 3 tablespoons sugar in a medium bowl; set 
aside. 
2. Put the egg yolks, 1/4 cup sugar, the espresso, and 
salt in the heatproof bowl of an electric mixer. Set 
the bowl over a pan of simmering water; whisk until 
thick, about 2 minutes. Transfer the bowl to an electric 
mixer fitted with the whisk attachment; beat on 
medium speed 2 minutes. Stir in the mascarpone 
and vanilla by hand until smooth. Stir in the torrone; 
set aside. 
3. Beat the cream with the remaining 3 tablespoons 
sugar in a clean mixing bowl until soft peaks form. 
Fold the whipped cream with a rubber spatula into 
mascarpone mixture. Refrigerate. 
4. Line a 10 x 5 x   loaf pan with plastic wrap 
and parchment paper, leaving an overhang on the 
sides. Pour one-third of the mascarpone mixture 
into the lined pan; even the layer with an offset spatula. 
Evenly top with half of the crumb mixture; press 
the crumbs gently. Repeat to make a second layer 
of mascarpone mixture and crumbs. Top with the 
remaining mascarpone mixture. Loosely fold over 
the parchment and plastic wrap. Freeze at least 
3 hours, or overnight. 
5. To serve, let the cake stand at room temperature 
10 minutes. Set the loaf pan in a larger pan; pour 
cold water into the pan to reach three-quarters up 
the sides of the loaf pan. Let stand 10 seconds. Holding 
the parchment, lift out the cake. Invert onto a 
plate; peel off the plastic and parchment. Let stand 
10 minutes more before serving. 
lemon semifreddo cake 

MAKES TWO 4 x 8-INCH CAKES 

For perfectly smooth slices, cut the layered cake 
with a hot serrated knife. The cake can be 
wrapped well in plastic wrap and stored in the 
freezer for up to 3 weeks. 

Vanilla Sheet Cake (recipe follows) 
9 large egg yolks, room temperature 
1 cup plus 1 tablespoon granulated sugar 
5 tablespoons confectioners' sugar 


1/2 cup dry white wine 
1/2 cup plus 1 teaspoon fresh lemon juice 
Finely grated zest of 2 lemons 


1/2 cup cold water 
5 large egg whites 
2 cups heavy cream 
3 tablespoons light rum 


1. Line the bottoms and sides of two 5 x 9-inch loaf 
pans with parchment paper; set aside. Using a serrated 
knife, trim all edges of the vanilla sheet cake 
by 1 inch so it measures 8 x 12 inches. Slice the cake 
widthwise, through the top, into 3 vertical pieces, 
each 4 x 8 inches. Split each piece in half, slicing 
horizontally through the crumb. You should have 
six 4 x 8-inch layers. Set aside. 
2. Make the semifreddo: In a large heatproof bowl 
set over a pan of simmering water, whisk together 
the egg yolks, 1/2 cup granulated sugar, and 2 tablespoons 
confectioners' sugar until smooth. 
FROZEN DESSERTS 433 


3. Add the wine, 1/2 cup lemon juice, and lemon zest; 
cook, stirring constantly with a wooden spoon, and 
scraping across the bottom to prevent the mixture 
from sticking to the bowl, until the mixture is thick 
enough to coat the back of the spoon, 6 to 7 minutes. 
Remove from heat, and transfer to a large bowl. 
Let cool to room temperature (or place the pan in 
an ice-water bath, stirring occasionally). 
4. When the custard has cooled, combine the cold 
water, 1/2 cup granulated sugar, and remaining teaspoon 
lemon juice in a small saucepan. Bring the 
mixture to a simmer over medium heat. Cook until 
the mixture is slightly thickened and registers 
240 degrees F on a candy thermometer, about 8 minutes; 
wash down the sides of the pan with a pastry brush 
dipped in water to prevent crystals from forming. 
Remove from heat, and let the mixture cool 2 to 
3 minutes. 
5. Meanwhile, in the bowl of an electric mixer fitted 
with the whisk attachment, beat the egg whites 
and remaining tablespoon sugar on medium-high 
speed until stiff but not until dry peaks form. With 
the mixer still running, slowly drizzle the syrup mixture 
into the egg whites; continue beating until the 
meringue has cooled slightly and the bowl is cool 
to the touch. 
6. In another large mixing bowl, whip the cream 
with the remaining 3 tablespoons confectioners' 
sugar until soft peaks form. Fold the whipped cream 
into the cooled lemon mixture; fold in the egg white 
mixture. The mixture should be very smooth. Place 
the rum in a small bowl. 
7. Fit one of the cake layers in the bottom of each 
prepared loaf pan. Using a pastry brush, lightly 
moisten the top of the cake with rum. Using an offset 
spatula, evenly spread 11/2 cups lemon filling 
over each. Repeat the process, making another layer 
of cake, rum, and filling; cover each with one of the 
remaining cake layers. Place in the freezer at least 
5 hours or overnight. 
8. Just before serving, remove the pans from the 
freezer, and turn the cakes out of the pans; remove 
the parchment paper. Slice into pieces. 
vanilla sheet cake 

MAKES ONE 9 x 1  SHEET CAKE 

Because there is no butter in the sponge cake, it 
will remain soft when frozen in the Lemon Semifreddo 
Cake. 

1 cup all-purpose flour 
Pinch of salt 


1/2 teaspoon baking powder 
4 large eggs, separated 
1 cup sugar 
3 tablespoons boiling water 
1 vanilla bean, split and scraped 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Line a 9 x 1  baking 
pan with parchment paper, and set aside. Sift 
together the flour, salt, and baking powder in a 
medium bowl. 
2. In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the 
whisk attachment, beat together the egg yolks and 
sugar on medium-low speed until light and fluffy. 
Beat in the water and vanilla bean scrapings. Add 
the dry ingredients in 3 batches, scraping down the 
sides of the bowl with a rubber spatula as needed, 
just until the flour mixture is incorporated after 
each addition. 
3. In another mixing bowl, beat the egg whites until 
stiff but not until dry peaks form; whisk one-quarter 
of the egg whites into the batter to lighten. Fold in 
the remaining egg whites, and pour the batter into 
the prepared pan. Bake until the cake springs back 
when gently pressed in the center, 15 to 20 minutes. 
Transfer to a wire rack to cool completely. 
434 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


plum-ginger granita 

MAKES ABOUT 2 QUARTS 

1 piece (about 2 inches) peeled fresh ginger 

2 pounds ripe red plums, halved, pitted, 
and coarsely chopped, plus thin wedges 
for garnish (about 9 plums total) 


11/3 cups sugar 

1/4 teaspoon coarse salt 
1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 


1. Pulse ginger in a food processor until finely 
chopped; transfer to a large saucepan. Add plums, 
sugar, salt, and 5 cups water. Bring to a boil over 
medium-high heat. Reduce heat to medium. Simmer, 
stirring occasionally, until sugar has dissolved 
and plums have broken down, about 15 minutes. 
2. Pour plum mixture through a fine sieve into a 
9 x 1  shallow nonreactive dish; discard solids. 
Stir in vanilla. Chill in freezer until edges are frozen, 
about 11/2 hours. 
3. Remove from freezer; scrape with fork tines, 
pulling from edges into center. Return to freezer. 
Repeat process every 30 minutes until mixture is 
the texture of shaved ice, about 41/2 hours. Spoon 
into serving bowls; garnish with plums. 
QUICK ICE CREAM TOPPINGS 

A hot day is the perfect excuse for an impromptu 
ice cream party. Stock an assortment 
of cones, and make chocolate and 
caramel sauce ahead of time. To make 
caramel sauce, simply add cream, vanilla, 
lemon juice, and butter to hot sugar caramel. 
For a rich chocolate fudge sauce, melt bittersweet 
chocolate in heavy cream. Both of 
these sauces can be kept in the refrigerator 
for up to 1 week. Quickly cooking some 
berries with a little sugar makes a delicious 
and simple fruit sauce for sundaes, too. 

papaya sorbet 

MAKES ABOUT 4 CUPS; SERVES 4 

Use red-fleshed papayas, such as Sunrise Solo or 
Maradol. Be sure to ask your grocer which ones 
will have flesh with a rosy hue since a papaya's 
skin and shape may not be a good indication of 
its interior color. 

1/3 cup sugar 

3 pounds fresh red papayas (about 11/2 
medium), peeled, halved, seeded, and 
chopped 


1/2 cup fresh lime juice, plus thinly sliced 
rounds for garnish (3 to 4 limes total) 


1 tablespoon honey 

1. Bring sugar and 1 cup water to a boil in a medium 
saucepan. Reduce heat, and simmer, stirring occasionally, 
until sugar has dissolved and mixture is 
syrupy, about 4 minutes. Let cool completely. 
2. Puree papayas, lime juice, and honey in a food 
processor. Transfer to a medium bowl. Stir in sugar 
syrup. 
3. Freeze in an ice cream maker according to manufacturer's 
instructions. Transfer to an airtight container; 
freeze at least 21/2 hours (up to 1 week). Serve 
garnished with lime slices. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 221 CALORIES, 

0 G FAT, 0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 57 G CARBOHYDRATE, 11 MG 

SODIUM, 2 G PROTEIN, 6 G FIBER 

FROZEN DESSERTS 435 


custards 


AND 

puddings 



pumpkin bread pudding 

SERVES 6 

If you prefer to omit the bourbon, simply double 
the amount of hot water. 

Unsalted butter, room temperature, 
for the ramekins 


6 tablespoons dark-brown sugar 

1 cup raisins 
1/3 cup bourbon (optional) 


1/3 cup hot water 
1 15-ounce can pumpkin puree 


4 large eggs 
1 cup granulated sugar 


11/2 cups milk 
2 teaspoons pure vanilla extract 

1 teaspoon ground cinnamon 
1 teaspoon ground ginger 


1/4 teaspoon ground allspice 
Pinch of salt 


1 12-ounce day-old loaf brioche or 
challah bread, cut into   cubes 


Confectioners' sugar, for dusting 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees  F. Butter 6 10-ounce 
ramekins or custard cups, sprinkle each with 1 tablespoon 
brown sugar, and set aside on a baking 
sheet. Place the raisins in a small bowl, and cover 
with bourbon, if using, and the hot water; let soak 
until plump, about 20 minutes. Drain; set aside. 
2. In a large bowl, whisk together the pumpkin, 
eggs, granulated sugar, milk, vanilla, spices, and 
salt. Toss in the bread cubes, and stir gently to 
evenly coat; let stand a few minutes. Fold in the 
raisins. Divide among the prepared dishes, pressing 
down slightly to make level. 
3. Bake until the custard is set in the center and the 
top is golden, about 40 minutes. If the bread browns 
too quickly, cover it loosely with aluminum foil. Remove 
from the oven; let cool slightly. To serve, unmold 
onto plates; dust with confectioners' sugar. 
chocolate-espresso 
mascarpone puddings 

SERVES 6 

6 large egg yolks 

3/4 cup sugar 
1/3 cup unsweetened cocoa powder 
12 ounces mascarpone cheese 

11/2 tablespoons instant espresso powder 
dissolved in 1 tablespoon boiling-hot 
water 

3/4 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 
1/4 teaspoon coarse salt 
1 cup heavy cream 

Candied orange peel, for garnish 

(optional) 

1. Whisk the yolks and sugar in a large heatproof 
bowl until pale and creamy, about 1 minute. Set the 
bowl over a pan of simmering water; whisk until an 
instant-read thermometer registers 160 degrees F and the 
mixture is thickened, about 3 minutes. 
2. Remove from heat; whisk in the cocoa, cheese, 
espresso, vanilla, and salt. Refrigerate in an airtight 
container until cold, 30 minutes (or up to 2 days). 
3. Beat the cream with an electric mixer until soft 
peaks form. Top each serving of pudding with 
whipped cream. Garnish with candied orange peel, 
if desired. 
vanilla pudding 
with baked rhubarb 

SERVES 4 

1 cup sugar 
1/4 cup all-purpose flour 


1/2 teaspoon salt 

2 cups milk (not skim) 

11/2 vanilla beans, halved lengthwise 
4 large egg yolks, lightly beaten 

4 tablespoons unsalted butter, cut 
into small pieces 


Baked Rhubarb (recipe follows) 

438 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


1. Whisk together the sugar, flour, and salt in a 
medium bowl; set aside. Pour the milk into a 
medium saucepan; scrape in the vanilla seeds, and 
add the pods. Stir together. Cook over medium heat 
until tiny bubbles begin to form around the edges 
of the pan, about 7 minutes. 
2. Gradually add the milk mixture to the flour mixture, 
whisking constantly. Transfer the milk-flour 
mixture to the saucepan; cook over low heat, whisking 
constantly, 5 minutes. 
3. Put the egg yolks in a small bowl. Whisk in a 
small amount of the hot milk-flour mixture. Add the 
yolk mixture to the saucepan. Cook over medium 
heat, whisking constantly, until the mixture comes 
to a boil and thickens, 10 to 12 minutes. 
4. Remove from heat; discard the pods. Add the butter; 
whisk until melted. Pass the pudding through 
a fine sieve into a medium bowl, pressing it with a 
rubber spatula. Cover the surface of the pudding 
with plastic wrap to prevent a skin from forming. 
Let stand at room temperature until slightly cooled, 
about 30 minutes. 
5. Spoon the pudding into serving bowls; top with 
baked rhubarb. The pudding can be refrigerated, 
covered with plastic wrap, up to 1 day. 
baked rhubarb 

SERVES 4 

Unsalted butter, softened, for the dish 

1 pound rhubarb, leaves discarded and 
stalks cut diagonally into   pieces 


3/4 cup sugar 
2 tablespoons light corn syrup 
1/2 vanilla bean, halved lengthwise 


1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Butter an 8-inch-square 
baking dish; set aside. Put the rhubarb, sugar, and 
corn syrup in a medium bowl. Scrape in the vanilla 
seeds, and add the pod. Toss together. 
2. Transfer to the buttered baking dish. Bake the 
rhubarb, tossing gently halfway through, until tender, 
about 35 minutes. Discard the pod. Let cool 
slightly in the dish on a wire rack. Toss gently before 
serving. 
chocolate pudding 

MAKES SIX 6-OUNCE SERVINGS 

1/3 cup plus 1 tablespoon unsweetened 
cocoa powder 


2 tablespoons cornstarch 
1/8 teaspoon salt 


1 cup sugar 
4 large egg yolks 


21/2 cups milk 
1/2 cup heavy cream 

1/2 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 

4 ounces semisweet chocolate, 
finely chopped 


Whipped cream, for garnish (optional) 

Chocolate shavings, for garnish 
(optional) 


1. Into a medium bowl, sift together the cocoa, cornstarch, 
and salt. Stir in the sugar. Add the egg yolks 
to the bowl, and pour in 1/2 cup milk; whisk until well 
combined. 
2. In a medium saucepan, heat the remaining 2 cups 
milk and the heavy cream over medium heat until 
the mixture just comes to a boil. Slowly whisk the 
milk mixture into the cocoa mixture. 
3. Rinse out the saucepan but do not dry (to help 
prevent scorching). Return the custard mixture to 
the saucepan, and place over medium-low heat. Stir 
in the vanilla. Stirring constantly with a wooden 
spoon, cook until the custard has thickened slightly 
and is the consistency of mayonnaise, about 10 minutes 
(do not let it boil). Don't worry if lumps form. 
4. Pour the custard through a fine sieve into a clean 
bowl, discarding any solids. Add the chopped 
chocolate in two batches, stirring until thoroughly 
melted and combined after each addition. 
5. Divide the pudding among 6 serving dishes, 
cover with plastic wrap, and chill at least 4 hours or 
up to overnight before serving. Garnish with 
whipped cream and chocolate shavings, if desired. 
CUSTARDS AND PUDDINGS 439 


lemon sponge pudding 

SERVES 6 

For individual servings, divide the pudding 
among six 6-ounce ramekins; reduce the cooking 
time to 25 minutes. 

3 tablespoons unsalted butter, 
room temperature, plus more for 
the baking dish 


2/3 cup granulated sugar 

1/4 teaspoon salt 
3 large eggs, separated 


3 tablespoons all-purpose flour 
1 cup milk 


6 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 
2 tablespoons finely grated lemon zest 


Confectioners' sugar, for dusting 

1. Preheat the oven to 325 degrees F. Butter a shallow 9-inch 
round glass or ceramic baking dish; set aside. In a 
large bowl, stir together the butter, granulated 
sugar, and salt. Stir in the yolks. Add the flour, milk, 
and lemon juice and zest; mix until incorporated. 
2. In a separate bowl, beat the egg whites until stiff 
but not dry peaks form. Gently fold the egg whites 
into the butter mixture. 
3. Ladle the batter into the prepared dish. Set the 
dish in a roasting pan; pour boiling water around 
the dish to come halfway up the sides. Bake until 
just set and lightly golden, 30 to 35 minutes. Remove 
the ramekins from the roasting pan; let cool 
slightly. Dust with confectioners' sugar, and serve. 
rice pudding with 
candied butternut squash 

SERVES 10 

Unsalted butter, softened, for 
the ramekins 


1 cup Arborio or other short-grain 
white rice 


5 cups whole milk 

1 cup heavy cream 
1/2 cup sugar 


4 large egg yolks, lightly beaten 
1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 


1/2 teaspoon finely grated lemon zest 
1/4 teaspoon ground nutmeg 


4 cups boiling water 

Candied Butternut Squash 
(recipe follows) 


1/2 cup walnut halves (about 2 ounces), 
toasted and coarsely chopped 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees  F. Lightly butter ten 
5-ounce ramekins; set aside. Put the rice and milk 
in a medium saucepan over medium-high heat. 
Cook, stirring occasionally, until the milk is just 
about to simmer. Reduce heat to medium. Simmer 
gently, stirring occasionally, until the rice is tender, 
15 to 20 minutes. Remove the pan from the heat. 
2. Meanwhile, whisk the cream, sugar, egg yolks, 
salt, lemon zest, and nutmeg in a medium bowl. 
Pour the cream mixture into the rice mixture in a 
slow, steady stream, stirring constantly. Return the 
pan to medium-high heat, and bring to a boil, stirring 
occasionally. Remove from heat. Using a ladle, 
divide the rice mixture evenly among the buttered 
ramekins, stirring the mixture in the pan each time 
to ensure an even distribution of rice and liquid. 
3. Transfer the ramekins to a large roasting pan or 
2 baking dishes at least 2 inches deep. Slowly pour 
boiling water into the pan to come halfway up the 
sides of the ramekins. Carefully place in the oven. 
Cook, rotating the pan halfway through, until the 
puddings are almost set and the tops are golden 
in places, 50 to 60 minutes. Carefully transfer the 
440 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


ramekins to a wire rack. Let cool 10 minutes before 
serving. The pudding can be stored in the refrigerator 
up to 1 day. Serve warm, cold, or at room 
temperature. Spoon the candied squash and its 
syrup on top of each pudding, dividing evenly; 
sprinkle with toasted walnuts. 

candied butternut squash 

MAKES ABOUT 4 CUPS 

1/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons orange 
marmalade 


1/3 cup sugar 
1 tablespoon minced peeled fresh ginger 


1/2 vanilla bean, split lengthwise 
Pinch of ground cloves 


2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 

1 small butternut squash 


1. Put the marmalade, sugar, ginger, vanilla bean, 
cloves, and lemon juice in a large, wide pot. Stir in 
21/2 cups water. Bring to a boil over medium-high 
heat, stirring to dissolve the marmalade and sugar. 
2. Add the squash, and stir to combine. Bring the 
mixture to a simmer. Reduce heat to medium-low, 
and partially cover the pot. Gently simmer, stirring 
occasionally, until the squash is tender when 
pierced with a fork, about 35 minutes. Uncover, and 
cook until the liquid is syrupy, 5 to 10 minutes. Remove 
the vanilla bean, and discard. Serve warm. 
The squash and syrup can be refrigerated in an airtight 
container up to 1 week. Before serving, reheat 
over medium-low heat. If the syrup seems too thick, 
add 1 to 2 tablespoons water. 
creme brulee 

MAKES FOUR 6-OUNCE SERVINGS 

To produce the delightful hard surface that crackles 
when tapped with a spoon, you will need to 
brown the sugared tops with a small kitchen 
blowtorch, available at most specialty stores. 

2 cups heavy cream 

1/2 vanilla bean, split and scraped 

1/2 cup sugar, plus 6 tablespoons 

for sprinkling 

5 large egg yolks 

1. Preheat the oven to 325 degrees F. Place 4 shallow oval 
6-ounce ramekins in a large baking pan lined with 
a kitchen towel. Bring a large pot of water to a boil, 
and keep hot until ready to use. 
2. Meanwhile, in a small saucepan, heat the cream, 
vanilla bean, and scrapings over medium heat until 
bubbles form around the edges and the mixture 
starts to steam, about 6 minutes. Turn off heat. 
3. In a large bowl, whisk together 1/2 cup sugar and 
the egg yolks until combined. Whisking constantly, 
slowly add the hot cream mixture. Strain the mixture 
through a fine sieve into a clean bowl; skim off 
any surface foam with a spoon. 
4. Pour the custard into the ramekins. Carefully 
pour the hot water into the baking pan until it 
reaches halfway up the sides of the ramekins. Bake 
until the custard is just set in the center when gently 
touched with your finger, about 35 minutes. 
Transfer the ramekins to a wire rack to cool. Cover 
with plastic wrap, and place in refrigerator to chill 
completely, 2 to 3 hours or overnight. 
5. Transfer to the freezer 45 minutes before serving. 
Remove from the freezer, and sprinkle 11/2 tablespoons 
sugar over the entire surface of each. 
Using a kitchen torch, pass the flame in a circular 
motion 1 to 2 inches above the surface until the 
sugar bubbles, turns amber, and forms a smooth 
surface. Serve immediately. 
CUSTARDS AND PUDDINGS 441 


coffee creme brulee 

MAKES 5  

1 quart heavy cream 
11/2 cups dark Italian-roast coffee beans 

10 large egg yolks 

2/3 cup granulated sugar 

1/4 teaspoon salt 

Boiling water, for the roasting pan 

5 tablespoons superfine sugar 

1. Preheat the oven to 320 degrees F. Bring the cream and 
coffee beans to a boil in a medium saucepan. Cover, 
and reduce heat to low; cook at a bare simmer 30 
minutes. Pour the mixture through a fine sieve into 
a medium bowl (or use a slotted spoon to remove 
beans); discard the beans. 
2. Put the yolks, granulated sugar, and salt in a large 
bowl; whisk until the sugar is dissolved and the mixture 
is pale and thick. Gradually add the cream in 
a slow, steady stream, whisking until combined. 
Pour through a cheesecloth-lined sieve into a large 
glass measuring cup or pitcher; skim any foam or 
bubbles from the surface. 
3. Divide the custard among the molds, filling them 
almost to the top. Place the molds in a roasting pan; 
put the pan on an oven rack, and pour boiling water 
around the molds to reach halfway up the sides. 
Bake until the custards are set around the edges but 
still loose in the centers, about 30 minutes. 
4. Let the molds cool in the pan 10 minutes; remove 
from the water bath. Cover each with plastic wrap, 
pressing it onto the surface; refrigerate at least 2 
hours or up to 2 days. 
5. If using a torch to caramelize the custards, just 
before serving use a fine sieve to sift 1 tablespoon 
superfine sugar over each; wipe the sugar from the 
edges. Hold the torch at a 90-degree angle, 3 to 4 
inches from the surface of each custard, and use a 
steady sweeping motion to caramelize the tops 
until golden brown. 

6. If you don't have a torch, freeze the custards 20 
minutes before topping with sugar. Preheat the 
broiler, and place the molds on a rimmed baking 
sheet; surround with ice cubes. Broil, rotating the 
sheet once, until the tops are golden brown, 2 to 3 
minutes. If the molds become warm, refrigerate the 
custards for a few minutes before serving. 
classic bread pudding 

SERVES 8 

For individual bread puddings, divide the mixture 
among eight buttered 6-ounce ramekins; reduce 
the cooking time to 40 minutes. 

2 tablespoons unsalted butter, 
softened, for baking dish 


12 ounces brioche or challah, cut 
into   cubes 


2 cups milk 

3 cups heavy cream 

4 large eggs plus 1 large egg yolk 

1 cup sugar 

1/2 teaspoon salt 

1 tablespoon pure vanilla extract 

1/2 teaspoon ground cinnamon 

1/4 teaspoon ground nutmeg 

1/2 cup raisins 

1 cup boiling water, plus more for the pan 

1. Butter a 9 x 1  baking dish; set aside. Put the 
bread in a large bowl; set aside. Heat the milk and 
cream in a medium saucepan over medium-high 
heat until just about to simmer; remove from heat. 
2. Whisk the eggs, yolk, sugar, salt, vanilla, cinnamon, 
and nutmeg in a medium bowl. Whisking constantly, 
pour the cream mixture in a slow, steady 
stream into the egg mixture. Pour over the bread; 
fold to combine. Let stand 30 minutes, tossing and 
pressing occasionally to submerge the bread. 
3. Meanwhile, soak the raisins in 1 cup boiling water 
for 30 minutes. 
442 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


4. Drain; stir the raisins into the bread mixture. Preheat 
the oven to 350 degrees F. With a slotted spoon, transfer 
the bread to the buttered dish; pour the liquid 
in the bowl over the top. Using a spoon, turn the top 
layer of bread crust side up. 
5. Set the dish in a roasting pan; transfer to the oven. 
Pour boiling water into the pan to reach about 
halfway up the sides of the dish. Bake until golden 
brown, about 50 minutes. Let the dish cool on a rack 
10 to 20 minutes. 
VARIATIONS 

BANANA, COCONUT, RUM Stir 3 tablespoons rum 
into the egg mixture. Heat 2 tablespoons each 
brown sugar and unsalted butter in a skillet until 
melted and caramelized. Add 2 sliced bananas; 
cook 1 to 2 minutes. Fold into the soaked bread 
along with 3/4 cup flaked sweetened coconut. 

CHOCOLATE Add 8 ounces coarsely chopped semisweet 
or bittersweet chocolate to the hot cream 
mixture; stir until melted and well combined. Whisk 
the chocolate mixture into the egg mixture. 

CRANBERRY, ORANGE, PECAN Simmer 3/4 cup dried 
cranberries in 3/4 cup orange juice until plump, 3 to 5 
minutes. Drain the cranberries; fold into the soaked 
bread along with 2 tablespoons grated orange zest 
and 3/4 cup chopped toasted pecans. 

vanilla panna cotta 
with poached apricot halves 


SERVES 8 

1 envelope (1 scant tablespoon) unflavored 
gelatin 

4 cups heavy cream 

1 cup sugar 

1/2 vanilla bean, split and scraped 

16 Poached Apricot Halves (recipe follows) 

1. Prepare an ice-water bath; set aside. In a large 
bowl, sprinkle gelatin over 3 tablespoons cold water; 
let stand 5 minutes to soften. 
2. Combine the cream, sugar, and vanilla bean and 
scrapings in a medium saucepan over medium-
high heat. Gently simmer until bubbles form 
around the sides of the pan, about 5 minutes. Let 
cool slightly. Discard the vanilla pod. 

3. Pour the hot cream mixture into the gelatin mixture, 
and whisk until combined. Set the bowl in the 
ice bath. Let cool completely, stirring frequently. 
Strain the mixture through a fine sieve into a 
medium bowl. Divide among 8 custard cups. Cover 
tightly with plastic wrap, and chill until set, at least 
4 hours or overnight. 
4. When ready to serve, top each portion with 
2 poached apricot halves. 
poached apricot halves 

MAKES 24 

Keep the apricots submerged in the poaching liquid, 
or they will turn brown. Mixed with seltzer 
water, the poaching liquid makes a refreshing 
apricot fizz. 

11/2 cups sugar 

3 strips (about 2 inches long) fresh lemon 
peel, pith removed 


2 thin slices fresh ginger 

7 cardamom pods, cracked 

1 vanilla bean, split lengthwise 
and scraped 


12 small ripe apricots, halved and pitted 
(about 11/2 pounds) 


1. In a 4- to 5-quart pot over medium heat, combine 
4 cups water with the sugar, lemon peel, ginger, cardamon, 
and vanilla scrapings. Bring the mixture to 
a boil. Cook until the sugar dissolves, and then reduce 
heat to low. Simmer, uncovered, until the 
liquid has thickened slightly, about 10 minutes. 
2. Add the apricots to the pan. Rinse a double thickness 
of cheesecloth under cold water, and drape it 
over the apricots so all the fruit is covered by the 
cloth and submerged in the liquid. 
3. Continue simmering until the apricots soften 
slightly, 2 to 4 minutes. Remove from heat, and let 
cool completely. Use immediately, or transfer the 
apricots and poaching liquid to a storage container. 
Make sure the apricots are completely submerged 
in the liquid. Refrigerate, covered, up to 4 days. 
CUSTARDS AND PUDDINGS 443 


indian pudding 

SERVES 6 

4 tablespoons unsalted butter, plus more 
for the ramekins, room temperature 


11/2 cups Roasted Butternut Squash Puree 
(recipe follows) 

6 large eggs 

1/2 teaspoon ground ginger 
1/2 teaspoon ground cinnamon 


1/2 teaspoon ground nutmeg 
1/2 teaspoon salt 


4 cups milk 
1/2 cup pure maple syrup 


1/4 cup unsulfured molasses 
1/2 cup yellow cornmeal 


1 pint vanilla ice cream 

1. Preheat the oven to 325 degrees  F. Butter 6 12-ounce 
ramekins. Bring a pot of water to a boil for a hot-
water bath. In a large mixing bowl, whisk together 
the squash puree, eggs, spices, and salt; set aside. 
2. In a medium saucepan, bring the milk, syrup, molasses, 
and butter to a simmer. While whisking, 
slowly add the cornmeal. Cook, whisking, until the 
mixture thickens, 5 to 7 minutes. 
3. While whisking, pour the hot milk mixture into 
the reserved squash mixture. Whisk until well combined. 
Divide the mixture equally among the prepared 
ramekins, and place in a roasting pan. 
4. Transfer pan to the oven; pour boiling water into 
the pan to reach halfway up the sides of the ramekins. 
Bake until the pudding is firm to the touch, 
about 1 hour. Remove the ramekins from the pan, 
and serve warm with a scoop of ice cream. 
roasted butternut squash puree 

MAKES ABOUT 21/4 CUPS 

3 pounds butternut squash, halved and 
seeded 


Canola oil, for baking sheet 

1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees  F. Place the squash 
halves, skin side up, on an oiled rimmed baking 
sheet. Bake until fork tender, about 11/4 hours. Remove 
from the oven. Turn over; let stand until cool 
enough to handle. 
2. Scoop the flesh into a food processor, and discard 
the skin. Puree until smooth. Refrigerate the 
squash puree in an airtight container up to 4 days, 
or store in the freezer up to 1 month. 
almond flan 

SERVES 12 

1/2 cup plus 2/3 cup sugar 

2 tablespoons water 
4 cups half-and-half 


6 ounces blanched whole almonds 
(about 3/4 cup), toasted and finely ground 


Pinch of salt 
3 large whole eggs 


6 large egg yolks 
3 tablespoons amaretto 


1. Preheat the oven to 325 degrees F. In a small saucepan, 
bring 1/2 cup sugar and the water to a boil over 
medium-high heat. Without stirring, cook until the 
syrup is a rich amber color, about 8 minutes; brush 
down the sides of the pan with a wet pastry brush 
to prevent crystals from forming. Pour into an 8 x 
  round tart pan, swirling to coat the bottom 
evenly. Set aside. 
2. In a medium saucepan over medium-high heat, 
bring the half-and-half and ground almonds just to 
a boil; remove from heat. Let steep, covered, 20 minutes. 
Strain through a fine sieve into a clean 
saucepan, pressing with a rubber spatula to extract 
the liquid; discard the solids. 
444 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


3. Whisk the remaining 2/3 cup sugar and the salt 
into the mixture in the saucepan; bring to a simmer 
over medium-high heat. Whisk together the eggs 
and yolks in a medium bowl. Whisking constantly, 
gradually add the half-and-half mixture. Stir in the 
amaretto. Pour through a fine sieve into the prepared 
pan; place in a roasting pan. 
4. Cover the flan with foil; poke several holes in the 
foil. Place the pan in the oven; fill it with boiling 
water to reach halfway up the sides of the flan. Bake 
until just set, 50 to 55 minutes. Transfer to a wire 
rack to cool completely. Cover with plastic wrap; 
chill overnight. Run a thin knife around the edge 
of the flan; invert onto a serving plate. 
chocolate brownie spoon bread 

SERVES 8 

1/2 cup (1 stick) unsalted butter, plus 
more for the skillet 


4 ounces semisweet chocolate, chopped 

1/2 cup all-purpose flour 
1/2 cup unsweetened cocoa powder 


1/2 teaspoon baking powder 
Pinch of salt 


4 large eggs, room temperature 

1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 

1 cup sugar 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Butter an 8-inch seasoned 
cast-iron skillet; set aside. Place the chocolate 
and butter in a medium heatproof bowl. Set it 
over a pan of simmering water; stir until almost 
melted. Remove from heat; let cool, stirring. Set aside. 
2. Into a medium bowl, sift together the flour, cocoa, 
baking powder, and salt. Sift again, and set aside. 
In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle 
attachment, beat the eggs and vanilla until thick 
and pale, about 6 minutes. Beat in the sugar until 
fluffy. Stir in the chocolate mixture. Fold in the dry 
ingredients until just combined. 
3. Pour the batter into the prepared skillet. Bake until 
the spoon bread is set but still soft in the center, about 
40 minutes (cook less for a more molten center). Let 
cool 10 minutes; serve warm in the skillet. 
poire william charlottes 

MAKES 6 

for the cake 

8 tablespoons (1 stick) unsalted butter, 
softened, plus more for the baking pan 


11/4 cups plus 2 tablespoons all-purpose 
flour, plus more for dusting 

1 teaspoon baking powder 

1/2 teaspoon salt 
11/4 cups sugar 

3 large eggs 

1/3 cup milk 

3/4 cup Poire William (pear brandy) 
1 cup peeled, diced pear 
1/2 cup finely chopped toasted pistachios 

for the filling 

1 medium pear, peeled and chopped 

2 tablespoons Poire William (pear brandy) 

3/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons milk 
4 large egg yolks 

1/2 cup sugar 

Pinch of salt 

1 cup heavy cream 
31/4 teaspoons unflavored gelatin 

1. Make the cake: Preheat the oven to 325 degrees F. Butter 
a 9 x 1  baking pan. Line the bottom with 
parchment paper. Butter the lining; then flour the 
pan, tapping out excess. Whisk together the flour, 
baking powder, and salt. 
2. Put the butter and sugar in the bowl of an electric 
mixer fitted with the paddle attachment; cream 
on medium speed until pale and fluffy. Mix in the 
eggs, 1 at a time. Add the flour mixture in 3 additions, 
alternating with 2 additions of milk. On low 
speed, mix in 1/4 cup brandy and the pear and nuts. 
3. Pour the batter into the prepared pan; spread 
evenly. Bake until golden brown and springy to the 
touch, about 40 minutes. Let cool completely on a 
wire rack. 
CUSTARDS AND PUDDINGS 445 


4. Invert the cake to unmold; peel off the parchment. 
Using a long serrated knife, trim off the sides 
of the cake. Cut the cake crosswise into quarters 
(each about 21/2 inches wide). Split the quarters horizontally 
into 3 strips each (to make 12 strips total). 
5. Cut each of 10 strips into 6 (11/4 x 2 ) rectangles 
(for a total of 60 strips). Using a   round 
cookie cutter, cut out 6 rounds from the remaining 
2 strips. 
6. Line 6 charlotte molds (4 inches in diameter and 
21/4 inches high) or 10-ounce ramekins with overlapping 
strips, standing them vertically (about 10 
strips per mold). Press 1 round onto the bottom of 
each mold. Using the remaining 1/2 cup brandy, 
brush the cake in the molds. 
7. Make the filling: Puree the pear and brandy in a 
food processor; set aside. Prepare an ice-water bath; 
set aside. Heat the milk in a medium saucepan over 
medium heat until just about to simmer. 
8.Whisk together the yolks, sugar, and salt. Pour 
half of the hot milk into the yolk mixture, whisking 
constantly. Add the yolk mixture to the remaining 
hot milk in the pan; whisk. Cook over 
medium heat, stirring with a wooden spoon, until 
the mixture is thick enough to coat the back of a 
spoon. Pour through a fine sieve into a bowl set in 
the ice-water bath. Let cool, stirring occasionally. 

9. Beat the cream to soft peaks; set aside. Sprinkle 
the gelatin over 1/4 cup water in a medium heatproof 
bowl. Let stand 1 minute to soften. Set the bowl over 
a pan of simmering water; stir until the gelatin is 
dissolved. Stir the gelatin mixture into the custard 
in the ice-water bath. Stir in the pear puree. Whisk 
until it thickens to a puddinglike consistency. 
Whisk in the whipped cream. 
10. Divide the mixture among the molds (about 
1/2 cup per mold). Cover with plastic wrap, pressing 
it directly on the surfaces; refrigerate until set, 
about 1 hour. Run a knife around the edges of the 
charlottes; invert onto plates. Serve cold. 
tiramis cups 

MAKES TEN 6-OUNCE SERVINGS 

This recipe will also make four 16-ounce servings; 
divide filling amounts accordingly. 

6 ounces store-bought crisp ladyfingers 

1 cup strong coffee 

Mascarpone Filling (recipe follows) 

Mocha Filling (recipe follows) 

1/2 tablespoon ground espresso, for garnish 

Set aside 5 ladyfingers; break the remainder into 
large pieces. To assemble, dip the pieces in the coffee; 
fit a layer into the bottom of each cup. Cover 
each with 1/4 cup mascarpone filling. Top with another 
layer of ladyfingers dipped in coffee; cover 
with 1/4 cup mocha filling. Garnish each with a dollop 
of mascarpone filling, half a reserved ladyfinger, 
and a sprinkling of espresso. 

mascarpone filling 

MAKES ABOUT 5 CUPS 

1 large whole egg 

3 large eggs, separated 

1 cup sugar 

1/2 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 

16 ounces mascarpone, room temperature 

1. In the heatproof bowl of an electric mixer, combine 
the egg, egg yolks, 1/2 cup sugar, and vanilla. 
Place over a pan of simmering water; whisk until 
the sugar is dissolved, about 3 minutes. Transfer 
the bowl to the mixer; using the whisk attachment, 
beat on medium-high speed until the mixture is 
cool, about 5 minutes. Add the mascarpone; beat 
on low speed to combine. Set aside. 
2. Place the egg whites in another heatproof mixing 
bowl set over a pan of simmering water. Add 
the remaining 1/2 cup sugar; whisk until it is dissolved, 
about 2 minutes. Transfer the bowl to the 
mixer; using the whisk attachment, beat on medium 
speed until soft peaks form, about 5 minutes. Fold 
one-third of the egg whites into the mascarpone 
mixture; fold in the remaining whites. Refrigerate, 
covered, until ready to use, up to 1 day. 
446 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


mocha filling 

MAKES 21/2 CUPS 

1/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons sugar 

1/4 cup cornstarch 
Pinch of coarse salt 


1 ounce unsweetened chocolate, chopped 
1 cup half-and-half 


3 large egg yolks 
1 large whole egg 


1 cup hot strong coffee 
1 tablespoon unsalted butter 


1. Prepare an ice-water bath; set aside. In a large 
heatproof bowl set over a pan of simmering water, 
combine the sugar, cornstarch, and salt. Add the 
chocolate, half-and-half, egg yolks, and egg; whisk 
until the chocolate is melted, about 3 minutes. 
Slowly add the coffee, whisking constantly. 
2. Cook, stirring with a wooden spoon, until the 
mixture is thick enough to coat the back of the 
spoon, 2 to 3 minutes. Remove from heat; stir in the 
butter. Place the bowl in the ice bath; stir occasionally 
until the mixture is cool. Store in an airtight 
container at room temperature up to 1 day. 
zabaglione 

SERVES 4 

4 large egg yolks 
1/4 cup sugar 


1/2 cup sweet Marsala wine 

Black Pepper Cookies, for serving (recipe 
follows) 

1. Whisk the yolks and sugar in a medium glass 
bowl until creamy, about 5 minutes. 
2. Set the bowl over a pan of barely simmering 
water. Add the Marsala; whisk until the mixture almost 
doubles in volume, about 15 minutes, scraping 
down the sides of the bowl as needed. Serve 
with black pepper cookies. 
NOTE The eggs in this dish are not fully cooked; it 
should not be prepared for pregnant women, babies, 
young children, the elderly, or anyone whose health 
is compromised. 

black pepper cookies 

MAKES ABOUT 21/2 DOZEN 

1/4 cup (1/2 stick) unsalted butter, softened 

1/3 cup sugar 
1/8 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 


Pinch of salt 
2 large egg whites, room temperature 


1/3 cup all-purpose flour 
1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 


1. Preheat the oven to 425 degrees F with a rack in the center. 
Put the butter and sugar in the bowl of an electric 
mixer fitted with the paddle attachment; cream 
on medium speed until pale and fluffy. Mix in the 
vanilla and salt. Beat in the egg whites until incorporated. 
Combine the flour and pepper in a small 
bowl; add to the butter mixture in 3 batches, mixing 
until just combined. 
2. Put the dough in a pastry bag fitted with a   
round tip (such as Ateco #804). Pipe   strips, 
about 1/2 inch apart, on a parchment-lined baking 
sheet, keeping the tip close to the sheet for thin 
cookies. Bake until the edges are golden and the 
centers are set, about 7 minutes. Let cool on the 
sheet 5 minutes before transferring with a spatula 
to a wire rack to cool completely. 
zuppa inglese 

SERVES 6 TO 8 

This recipe can be doubled or tripled. 

8 ounces store-bought crisp ladyfingers 
(about 26 cookies) 


1/2 cup Italian dessert wine, preferably 
vin santo 


Crema Pasticcera (recipe follows) 
Salsa di Cioccolato (recipe follows) 


Arrange half the ladyfingers in the bottom of an 
8-inch-square serving dish. Drizzle with half the 
wine. Spread 11/2 cups pastry cream on top. Drizzle 
1/2 cup chocolate sauce over the cream. Repeat, 
adding another layer each of ladyfingers, wine, pastry 
cream, and chocolate sauce. Refrigerate, covered, 
1 to 4 hours. 

CUSTARDS AND PUDDINGS 447 


crema pasticcera 

MAKES 3 CUPS 

2 cups whole milk 

Finely grated zest of 1 lemon 

1 large egg plus 2 large egg yolks 

1 cup sugar 

1 cup all-purpose flour 

1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 

1. Stir together the milk and lemon zest in a small 
saucepan. Heat over medium-low heat, stirring, just 
until small bubbles appear at the edges. Remove 
the pan from the heat. 
2. Put the egg and yolks and the sugar in the bowl 
of an electric mixer fitted with the whisk attachment. 
Beat on high speed until pale, 3 to 4 minutes. 
Reduce the speed to low. Add the flour and vanilla. 
Beat until just combined. Beat in the hot milk mixture. 
Raise the speed to high; beat 1 minute more. 
Transfer the pastry cream to the saucepan. Cook 
over medium heat, whisking constantly, until the 
mixture has thickened, 2 to 3 minutes. 
3. Transfer the warm pastry cream to a bowl. Place 
a piece of plastic wrap directly on the surface. Refrigerate 
until chilled, about 2 hours, or up to 1 day. 
salsa di cioccolato 

MAKES 1 CUP 

21/2 ounces good-quality unsweetened 
chocolate, coarsely chopped 

21/2 tablespoons good-quality Dutch-process 
cocoa powder 

1/2 cup sugar 

1/2 cup heavy cream 

1. Melt the chocolate with the cocoa powder in a 
heatproof bowl set over a pan of simmering water, 
stirring constantly, until mixture is thickened and 
becomes difficult to stir. 
2. Remove from the heat; continue to stir, and add 
the sugar. Return the bowl to the pan of simmering 
water. Heat, stirring constantly, until the sugar has 
dissolved and the sauce is smooth. Add the cream; 
stir until smooth. Remove from heat. Let cool completely. 
The sauce can be refrigerated in an airtight 
container up to 1 day; before using, warm the sauce 
in a bowl set over a pan of simmering water until 
pourable. 

chocolate souffle 

SERVES 6 

With its chewy exterior and warm, puddinglike 
center, this dessert might be considered the more 
refined cousin of molten cake. With or without 
creme anglaise, it's a showstopper. 

Unsalted butter, melted, for dish 
1/2 cup sugar, plus more for dusting 


5 ounces bittersweet chocolate, chopped 
2 ounces semisweet chocolate, chopped 


11/3 cups milk 

6 large egg yolks plus 8 large egg whites, 
room temperature 


6 tablespoons all-purpose flour 
2 tablespoons brandy (optional) 


1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 
Salt 


Pinch of cream of tartar (if not using a 
copper bowl) 

Creme Anglaise (page 658) 

1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F, with a rack in the lower 
third. Do not open the oven door until ready to bake. 
Brush the outer lip of a 2-quart souffle dish with 
melted butter. Tie a sheet of parchment around the 
dish with kitchen twine. Brush the inside of the dish 
and collar with melted butter. Dust with sugar; tap 
out excess. Chill the dish in the freezer 15 minutes. 
2. Stir the chocolates in a large heatproof bowl set 
over a saucepan of simmering water until smooth. 
Scald the milk in a saucepan over medium heat; remove 
from heat. Using an electric mixer fitted with 
the whisk, beat 6 tablespoons sugar and the yolks 
on high speed until pale, about 4 minutes. On low 
speed, beat in the flour. Beat in half the hot milk, 
ladling it in a little at time. 
448 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


  

CUSTARDS AND PUDDINGS 449 


3. Whisk the mixture into the pan of hot milk; bring 
to a boil over medium-high heat, whisking. Reduce 
heat to low; simmer until thick, about 2 minutes. 
Pour into the chocolate. Stir in the brandy (if desired), 
the vanilla, and a pinch of salt. 
4. Using a balloon whisk, beat the egg whites and 
a pinch of salt in a copper bowl until foamy. (Or 
beat with an electric mixer in a stainless-steel bowl 
with cream of tartar.) Add 1 tablespoon sugar; beat 
until the whites almost hold stiff peaks. Add the remaining 
tablespoon sugar, and beat until the peaks 
are stiff. 
5. Spoon one-third of the egg whites onto the base. 
Fold them in: Cut through the center of the mixture 
with a large rubber spatula, then gently turn the 
spatula over. Rotate the bowl a quarter-turn; continue 
folding in the whites and turning the bowl 
until mostly combined. Fold the remaining whites 
into the base, one-third at a time. 
6. Pour the mixture into the prepared dish. Place 
on a rimmed baking sheet. Bake 15 minutes. Reduce 
the temperature to 375 degrees  F; bake until set, 20 minutes. 
Remove the collar; serve immediately with 
creme anglaise, if desired. 






sweet potato flan 

MAKES ONE   FLAN 

2 sweet potatoes (11/4 pounds) 

13/4 cups sugar 
1/4 cup water 
1/4 teaspoon ground allspice 
1/2 teaspoon ground cinnamon 

3/4 teaspoon coarse salt 
5 large whole eggs 
2 large egg yolks 
2 teaspoons pure vanilla extract 
2 cups milk, scalded 
1. Preheat the oven to 450 degrees F. Place the sweet potatoes 
on a baking sheet, and roast until very soft, 
about 1 hour. Allow to cool. Peel off the skin, and 
discard. Place the sweet potatoes in the bowl of a 
food processor, and puree until completely smooth. 
Measure 11/2 cups puree, reserving any excess for 
another use. This step may be done 1 day ahead. 
2. Reduce the oven to 325 degrees F. Combine 1 cup sugar 
and the water in a small saucepan, and cook over 
medium heat, stirring occasionally, until the sugar 
dissolves. Brush down the sides of the pan with a 
pastry brush dipped in water to prevent crystallization. 
Increase heat to medium-high; boil, without 
stirring, until the syrup turns a deep amber, 5 
to 6 minutes. Pour the caramel into a savarin mold 
or a 9 x   round cake pan. Holding the pan 
with pot holders, swirl to coat the bottom and 
halfway up the sides of the dish. 
3. In a large bowl, combine the sweet potato puree, 
remaining 3/4 cup sugar, allspice, cinnamon, salt, 
eggs, and egg yolks. Mix in the vanilla and scalded 
milk, and then pass the mixture through a fine sieve. 
Pour into the caramel-lined pan, and cover with foil. 
Set in a roasting pan, and pour boiling water into 
the roasting pan halfway up the sides of the flan dish. 
4. Bake for 50 to 55 minutes, or until the center of 
the flan is nearly set: A thin-bladed knife inserted 
in the center should come out clean. Let cool to 
room temperature, and place in the refrigerator to 
chill overnight. 
5. To unmold, run a sharp knife carefully around 
the flan, and cover with a serving plate; invert 
quickly. Remove the pan; serve. 
450 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 








chocolate mousse with banana 
puree and grated coconut 

SERVES 8 TO 10 

4 large ripe bananas (about 2 pounds) 

1 cup champagne or sparkling wine 

1 cup sugar 

9 ounces semisweet chocolate, 
finely chopped 


3 large eggs 

2 cups heavy cream, cold 
1/2 cup grated or shaved coconut, for garnish 


1. Peel the bananas; cut into large pieces. Place in 
a saucepan with the champagne and 1/4 cup sugar. 
Bring to a boil; reduce to a gentle simmer. Cook, 
partially covered, until very soft, 10 to 15 minutes. 
Transfer to the bowl of a food processor; blend until 
smooth. Set aside to cool. Chill until ready to serve, 
up to 6 hours ahead. 
2. Place the chocolate in a heatproof bowl set over 
a pan of gently simmering water. Stir until melted; 
set aside. 
3. Place the eggs and remaining 3/4 cup sugar in another 
heatproof bowl; whisk until combined. Place 
over simmering water; whisk until warm. Remove 
the bowl from heat, and whisk until the mixture is 
pale and thick. Whisk in the melted chocolate. 
4. Place the cream in a clean stainless-steel bowl, 
and whisk until stiff peaks form. Fold the cream into 
the chocolate mixture. 
5. Place about 2 tablespoons banana puree in individual 
serving dishes; top with a dollop (about 1/2 
cup) mousse. Refrigerate until ready to serve, up to 
4 hours in advance. Garnish with coconut. 






bread-and-butter pudding 
with strawberries 

SERVES 4 TO 6 

Allowing the bread to soak in the custard batter 
for a full hour is the secret to a good bread-andbutter 
pudding. 

4 large eggs 

3/4 cup milk 
3/4 cup heavy cream 
7 tablespoons sugar 
2 tablespoons dark rum 


8 slices white bread 
4 tablespoons unsalted butter, very soft 


1 pint fresh strawberries, hulled and 
cut in half 


1. Whisk together the eggs, milk, heavy cream, 
3 tablespoons sugar, and rum. Set aside. 
2. Spread the top of each slice of bread with a generous 
amount of butter. Cut the slices in half diagonally. 
In a 9-inch round baking dish or cake pan, 
fan overlapping slices in 1 layer. It is also fine for 
the bread to overlap randomly. Pour the egg mixture 
over the bread, and let stand 1 hour. 
3. Heat the oven to 400 degrees F. Sprinkle the pudding 
with 2 tablespoons sugar. Bake until puffed golden 
brown and set, about 20 minutes. 
4. Meanwhile, combine the strawberries with the 
remaining 2 tablespoons sugar. Let stand while 
the pudding bakes. Serve the strawberries with the 
baked pudding. 
CUSTARDS AND PUDDINGS 451 


creme caramel 

SERVES 4 

1 teaspoon unflavored gelatin 
1 cup sugar 
2 large eggs, plus 1 large egg yolk 
1 cup heavy cream 


1/2 cup whole milk 
Pinch of salt 


1. Stir the gelatin and 2 teaspoons water in a small 
bowl until dissolved. 
2. Put 3/4 cup sugar into a large skillet over medium-
high heat. Cook, without stirring, until sugar at 
edges begins to melt and turn clear, about 3 minutes. 
Continue to cook, stirring constantly, until 
medium amber, 11/2 to 2 minutes. Remove from heat. 
Stir in 1/2 cup plus 2 tablespoons water. If sugar begins 
to solidify, return pan to medium heat until 
melted. Set caramel aside to cool completely. 
3. Prepare an ice-water bath; set aside. Whisk eggs 
and yolk in a medium bowl; set aside. Bring cream, 
milk, 1/4 cup sugar, and the salt to a simmer in a 
medium saucepan over medium-high heat. Whisk 
half the hot cream mixture into the eggs. Pour 
cream-egg mixture back into saucepan. Add gelatin 
mixture; whisk until combined. Reduce heat to 
low. Cook, stirring constantly, just until mixture is 
thick enough to coat the back of a spoon, about 31/2 
minutes. 
4. Pour custard into a bowl set in the ice-water bath. 
Let cool completely, stirring constantly, about 3 
minutes. Transfer to a large, shallow bowl. Refrigerate 
until set, at least 30 minutes. Pour reserved 
caramel over custard. Divide among serving cups 
or bowls. 
steamed ginger pudding 
with apricot jam 

SERVES 4 

6 tablespoons unsalted butter, softened, 
plus more for the bowl and parchment 


1/2 cup plus 2 tablespoons all-purpose flour 
1/2 teaspoon baking powder 


1/4 teaspoon ground ginger 
1/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons sugar 


1 large egg 
1/3 cup coarsely chopped candied ginger 


1 tablespoon honey 
1 tablespoon whole milk 


1/4 cup plus 1 tablespoon apricot jam 

1. Butter a 5-cup heatproof pudding basin or mixing 
bowl. Cut a parchment circle to fit top of bowl; 
butter. Fill a large pot fitted with a steamer or pasta 
insert with enough water to come halfway up bowl 
(test this with an empty bowl); set aside. 
2. Stir together flour, baking powder, and ground 
ginger in a small bowl. Put butter and sugar into 
the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle 
attachment; mix on medium speed until pale and 
fluffy. Mix in egg. Reduce speed to low. Add flour 
mixture in 3 batches. Add chopped ginger, honey, 
and milk; mix until just combined. 
3. Spoon jam into bottom of prepared bowl. Pour 
batter on top; smooth with a spatula. Cover bowl 
with prepared parchment, buttered side down. Place 
a tea towel on top; secure with kitchen twine. Tie 
opposing corners of towel on top of bowl. 
4. Bring water in prepared pot to a boil over 
medium-high heat. Carefully lower pudding bowl 
into steamer; cover pot. Reduce heat to medium-
low. Steam 2 hours, checking occasionally to make 
sure water doesn't completely evaporate. Transfer 
to a wire rack; remove towel and parchment. Let 
cool 10 minutes. Run a small knife around edge of 
bowl; invert pudding onto a plate. Serve warm. 
452 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


pies 


AND 

tarts 



black-bottom pie 

MAKES ONE 9-INCH PIE 

11/4 cups graham cracker crumbs 
1/4 cup (1/2 stick) unsalted butter, melted 

3 tablespoons sugar 
Pinch of salt 


1/3 cup sugar 

1/3 cup Dutch-process cocoa powder 
2 tablespoons cornstarch 


1/8 teaspoon salt 
11/2 cups whole milk 

3 ounces bittersweet chocolate, finely 
chopped 


2 tablespoons unsalted butter, cut into 
small pieces 


1/2 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 

for the topping 

11/2 teaspoons unflavored gelatin 

3/4 cup sugar 
1 tablespoon cornstarch 
1/8 teaspoon salt 


1 cup whole milk 
1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 


2 tablespoons light rum 
4 large egg whites, room temperature 


1. Make the crust: Stir together the graham cracker 
crumbs, butter, sugar, and salt in a bowl. Press into 
the bottom and up the sides of a 9-inch pie plate. 
Refrigerate until firm, about 30 minutes. Preheat 
the oven to 350 degrees F. Bake until the crust is set and 
begins to turn golden brown, about 12 minutes. Let 
cool completely on a wire rack. 
2. Make the filling: Sift together the sugar, cocoa 
powder, cornstarch, and salt into a medium 
saucepan. Gradually whisk in the milk. Cook over 
medium-high heat, stirring constantly, until almost 
boiling. Reduce heat to medium; add the chocolate. 
Cook, stirring constantly, until the chocolate has 
melted and the mixture is thick, about 2 minutes. 
Remove from heat; whisk in the butter and vanilla 
until smooth. Spread the chocolate mixture over the 
crust. Refrigerate until cold and firm, about 1 hour. 

3. Make the topping: Prepare an ice-water bath; set 
aside. Sprinkle the gelatin over 2 tablespoons cold 
water in a small bowl. Let stand until soft, about 3 
minutes. Whisk 1/4 cup sugar, the cornstarch, and 
the salt in a medium saucepan. Gradually whisk in 
the milk. Cook over medium-high heat, stirring constantly, 
until the mixture is thick and boiling, about 
5 minutes. Remove from heat; stir in the gelatin 
mixture, and let cool completely. Stir in the vanilla 
and rum. Briefly place the pan in the ice-water bath 
to thicken slightly, if needed. Do not let it set completely. 
Set aside. 
4. In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the 
whisk attachment, beat egg whites on medium-low 
speed until soft peaks form. Reduce speed to low; 
continue beating while you make the syrup. 
5. Bring the remaining 1/2 cup sugar and 3 tablespoons 
water to a boil in a saucepan, stirring to dissolve 
the sugar. Brush down the sides of the pan 
with a wet pastry brush to prevent crystals from 
forming. Cook, without stirring, until the syrup registers 
240 degrees F on a candy thermometer. 
6. Raise the mixer speed to high, and beat the egg 
whites just until stiff peaks begin to form. Immediately 
pour the syrup into the egg whites in a slow, 
steady stream near the side of the bowl, avoiding 
the whisk (it might splatter). Beat until glossy and 
cooled, about 7 minutes. 
7. Fold the meringue mixture into the reserved gelatin 
mixture in 3 batches until just combined. 
Mound the mixture into the chocolate-filled crust. 
Refrigerate the pie for 21/2 hours or overnight before 
serving. 
NOTE: The egg whites in this pie are not fully 
cooked; it should not be prepared for pregnant 
women, babies, young children, the elderly, or anyone 
whose health is compromised. 

454 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


port-caramel chocolate tartlets 

MAKES FORTY 2  TARTLETS 

Marcona almonds are grown in Spain and known 
for their buttery flavor. Fleur de sel is a French 
sea salt, but another good-quality coarse salt can 
be used in its place. 

for the tart shells 

21/2 cups all-purpose flour, plus more 
for dusting 

1/2 cup unsweetened cocoa powder 
1/2 cup sugar 


3/4 teaspoon fleur de sel 
1 stick (8 tablespoons) cold unsalted butter, 
cut into small pieces 

3 large eggs, lightly beaten 

for the filling 

1 cup sugar 
1/2 cup heavy cream 


3 tablespoons ruby or tawny port 

2 tablespoons cold unsalted butter, cut 
into small pieces 


1 ounce bittersweet chocolate (preferably 
70 percent cacao), chopped 


1 cup salted Marcona almonds (or roasted 
salted blanched almonds), finely chopped 

Fleur de sel, for sprinkling 

1. Make the tart shells: Process the flour, cocoa, 
sugar, and fleur de sel in a food processor until combined. 
Add the butter; pulse until the mixture resembles 
coarse meal. With the processor running, 
add the eggs; process just until the dough comes 
together (do not overmix). 
2. Turn out the dough onto a clean work surface; 
pat together. Wrap in plastic wrap. Refrigerate until 
firm, about 30 minutes. 
3. On a lightly floured work surface, roll out the 
dough to 1/8 inch thick. Using a   round cookie 
cutter, cut 10 rounds from the dough. Transfer the 
remaining dough to a flour-dusted baking sheet; 
refrigerate. 
4. Fit the dough rounds into 10 round tartlet molds 
(each 21/4 inches in diameter). Trim the edges of the 
dough flush with the top edges of the molds. (Refrigerate 
the scraps.) Refrigerate the shells until 
cold, 30 minutes. 
5. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Prick the bottoms of 
the shells all over with a fork. Bake until firm, about 
12 minutes. Let cool completely in molds on a wire 
rack; unmold. 
6. Working in batches of 10 and using the remaining 
dough (reroll scraps), repeat steps 3, 4, and 5 
to make 40 shells total. 
7. Make the caramel filling: Heat the sugar and 
1/2 cup water in a small saucepan over medium-high 
heat, stirring occasionally, gently, until the sugar 
has dissolved. Continue to cook, without stirring, 
until the syrup comes to a boil, occasionally washing 
down the sides of the pan with a wet pastry 
brush to prevent crystals from forming. Let boil, 
swirling the pan occasionally, until the syrup is dark 
amber. Remove from heat. 
8. Carefully stir in the cream and port (the caramel 
will steam and spatter). Add the butter and chocolate; 
stir until melted and mixture is smooth. Let 
cool until slightly thickened but still pourable, 
about 20 minutes. 
9. Cover the bottoms of the tart shells with almonds 
(about 1 teaspoon per shell). Spoon caramel filling 
into the shells, filling each almost to the top. Sprinkle 
with almonds and fleur de sel. Refrigerate until 
ready to serve, up to 3 hours. 
PIES AND TARTS 455 








shoofly pie 

MAKES ONE 9-INCH PIE 

1 disk Martha's Perfect Pate Brisee 
(page 647) 


1 cup all-purpose flour, plus more 
for the work surface 


1/2 cup packed light-brown sugar 

1 teaspoon ground cinnamon 
1/2 teaspoon freshly grated nutmeg 


Salt 
6 tablespoons cold unsalted butter, 
cut into   pieces 
1 cup boiling water 


1/2 cup unsulfured molasses 
1/2 cup light corn syrup 


1 teaspoon baking soda 
1 large egg, lightly beaten 


1. Roll out the dough on a lightly floured work surface 
to 1/8 inch thick. Fit the dough into a 9-inch 
pie plate. Trim the edges to leave a   overhang; 
fold the edges under, and crimp with your fingers. 
Freeze the pie shell 30 minutes or overnight. 
2. Preheat the oven to 325 degrees  F. Whisk together the 
flour, brown sugar, cinnamon, nutmeg, and 1/4 teaspoon 
salt in a medium bowl. Add the butter, and 
work the mixture through your fingers until it forms 
fine crumbs; set the crumb topping aside. 
3. Stir together the boiling water, molasses, and 
corn syrup in a medium bowl. Whisk in the baking 
soda, egg, and a pinch of salt. Pour the molasses 
mixture into the prepared pie shell. Scatter the 
crumb topping over the filling. Place the pie on a 
rimmed baking sheet. Bake until the filling is set 
and the topping is deep golden brown, about 50 
minutes. Let cool on a wire rack 30 minutes. 
ginger-pear hand pies 

MAKES 8 

2 large eggs 

2/3 cup plus 2 tablespoons granulated sugar 
2 teaspoons fresh lemon juice 


1/4 cup plus 3 tablespoons all-purpose flour, 
plus more for dusting 


11/2 teaspoons ground ginger 

1/4 teaspoon plus a pinch of salt 

9 tablespoons (1. sticks) unsalted butter 

1 vanilla bean, halved lengthwise and 
seeds scraped 


3 tablespoons finely grated peeled 
fresh ginger 


2 firm-fleshed pears, such as Bosc, peeled 
and cut into   dice 


Pie Pastry (recipe follows) 

Confectioners' sugar, for dusting 

1. Whisk together the eggs and 2/3 cup plus 1 tablespoon 
granulated sugar in a medium bowl until 
thick and pale yellow. Whisk in the lemon juice, 
then whisk in the flour, ground ginger, and pinch 
of salt; set aside. 
2. Put 8 tablespoons butter, the vanilla bean and 
seeds, and grated ginger in a small saucepan; cook 
over medium-high heat until the butter foams and 
browns, about 5 minutes. Pour the mixture through 
a fine sieve into a bowl; discard the solids. Whisking 
constantly, pour the butter mixture into the egg 
mixture; whisk until combined. 
3. Melt the remaining tablespoon butter in a 
medium skillet over medium-high heat. Add the 
pears and remaining 1/4 teaspoon salt and tablespoon 
sugar; cook, stirring, until the pears are soft, 
about 5 minutes. Let cool, about 10 minutes. Fold 
the pear mixture into the egg mixture; set aside. 
4. Roll out the dough on a lightly floured surface to 
1/8 inch thick. Using a paring knife or   cookie 
cutter, cut 8 rounds from the dough. Gently press 
the rounds into 8 cups of a 12-cup standard muffin 
tin, making pleats around the edges and gently 
pressing to seal. Fill each with 6 tablespoons pear 
mixture. Refrigerate 30 minutes. 
456 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


5. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Bake the pies until the 
crusts and filling are golden brown, about 30 minutes. 
Let cool in tins on a wire rack, about 20 minutes. 
Unmold; let cool completely on rack. Just 
before serving, dust with confectioners' sugar. 
pie pastry 

MAKES ENOUGH FOR 8 HAND PIES 

21/2 cups all-purpose flour 

1 teaspoon sugar 
1 teaspoon salt 


12 tablespoons (11/2 sticks) cold unsalted 
butter, cut into small pieces 


1/4 cup cold vegetable shortening 

1 tablespoon distilled white vinegar 
1/4 to 1/2 cup ice water 


1. Pulse the flour, sugar, and salt in the bowl of a 
food processor. Add the butter and shortening; 
pulse until the mixture resembles coarse meal, 8 to 
10 times. 
2. With the processor running, pour in the vinegar, 
then 1/4 cup ice water; process just until the dough 
comes together. (If the dough is still crumbly, add 
up to 1/4 more ice water, 1 tablespoon at a time.) 
3. Pat the dough into a disk, and wrap in plastic. Refrigerate 
the dough until cold, at least 1 hour and 
up to 1 day. The dough can also be frozen up to 1 
month; thaw completely in the refrigerator. 
cranberry tart with 
creme fraiche whipped cream 


MAKES ONE 9-INCH TART 

4 cups fresh cranberries (about 1 pound) 

11/2 cups sugar 
1 whole cinnamon stick 

1 disk Pate Sucree (page 651) 
All-purpose flour, for dusting 


1 large egg white, lightly beaten 
1 cup heavy cream 


1/2 cup creme fraiche 

1. Bring 1/2 cup water and the berries, sugar, and cinnamon 
to a simmer in a medium saucepan over 
medium-high heat. Cook, stirring, until the berries 
pop, about 2 minutes. Drain in a sieve set over a 
bowl. Return the strained liquid and cinnamon stick 
to pan; reserve the berries in the bowl. Simmer the 
liquid over medium-low heat until thickened, about 
15 minutes. Pour the syrup over berries; let cool. 
Discard the cinnamon. 
2. Bring the pate sucree to room temperature. On 
a lightly floured surface, roll out the dough to 1/8 
inch thick. Transfer to a 9-inch square or round tart 
pan with a removable bottom. Trim the edges, leaving 
a   overhang. Tuck the edges of the dough 
under to create a double thickness, and press firmly 
against the sides of the pan. Press the bottom of the 
dough firmly into the tart pan. Chill in the freezer 
20 minutes. 
3. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Line the tart shell with 
parchment or foil, and fill with pie weights or dried 
beans. Bake until golden brown, about 25 minutes. 
Transfer to a wire rack. Remove the pie weights and 
parchment. Let cool completely. 
4. Reduce the oven temperature to 350 degrees F. Brush the 
tart shell with the egg white. Fill with the cranberry 
mixture and syrup from the bowl. Bake until the 
syrup is only slightly runny and the berries begin 
to brown, 45 to 60 minutes (if the pastry edges 
brown too quickly, cover with a band of foil). 
5. Meanwhile, beat the cream to soft peaks. Beat in 
the creme fraiche; refrigerate. 
6. Let the tart cool on a rack until cool enough to 
remove from the tin. Serve warm, with creme fraiche 
whipped cream. 
PIES AND TARTS 457 


mini carrot-cardamom pies 

MAKES EIGHT 4-INCH PIES 

6 whole green cardamom pods 

2 tablespoons unsalted butter 
1/2 cup milk 


1/2 cup heavy cream 

1 teaspoon finely grated peeled 
fresh ginger 


12 ounces carrots, peeled and cut 
into   pieces (21/2 to 3 cups) 


1 cup sugar 

1/8 teaspoon coarse salt 
4 large eggs, lightly beaten 


1/2 cup finely ground gingersnap cookies 

1 disk Martha's Perfect Pate Brisee 
(page 647) 
Freshly whipped cream, for serving 


Ground cardamom, for dusting 

1. Make the filling: Crush the cardamom pods with 
the flat side of a chef's knife just to split. Melt 1 tablespoon 
butter in a small saucepan over medium 
heat; add the crushed cardamom. Cook until fragrant, 
about 3 minutes. Add the milk, cream, and 
ginger; bring to a simmer. Reduce heat to medium-
low; cook 15 minutes. Remove from heat; let steep 
30 minutes. 
2. Melt the remaining tablespoon butter in a large 
saute pan over medium heat. Add the carrots; cook, 
stirring occasionally, 2 minutes. Stir in the sugar 
and salt. Cover the pan; cook until the carrots are 
tender, about 8 minutes. Pour the steeped milk 
through a sieve into the pan with the carrots; discard 
the solids. Remove from heat; let cool slightly, 
about 5 minutes. Process the carrot mixture in a 
food processor until completely smooth; transfer 
to a bowl. 
3. Temper the beaten eggs by whisking in up to 3/4 
cup carrot mixture, 1/4 cup at a time, until the eggs 
are warm to the touch. Pour the warmed egg mixture 
into the remaining carrot mixture; whisk until 
thoroughly combined. Let cool. 
4. Make the pies: Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Lightly 
sprinkle the ground gingersnaps on a work surface 
to form a large circle about 18 inches in diameter. 
On the crumbs, roll out the pate brisee to 1/8 inch 
thick, turning occasionally to coat both sides. 
5. Cut out 8   rounds from the dough. Press 
the rounds into 8 4-inch pie plates; trim excess. With 
a fork, crimp the edges, and then prick the bottom 
of the dough all over. Refrigerate 30 minutes. 
6. Line each pie shell with parchment paper or foil, 
and fill with pie weights or dried beans. Bake until 
golden brown, about 30 minutes. Transfer to a wire 
rack. Remove the pie weights and parchment. Let 
the shells cool completely. 
7. Divide the filling among the shells. Bake until a 
cake tester comes out clean, 30 to 35 minutes. Serve 
the pies warm with whipped cream dusted with 
ground cardamom. 
pear-fig-walnut pie 

MAKES ONE 9-INCH PIE 

3/4 cup Madeira wine 
5 ounces soft, dried black Mission figs 
(scant 2/3 cup), stemmed and quartered 
3 whole star anise 


Martha's Perfect Pate Brisee (page 647), 
almost room temperature 

All-purpose flour, for dusting 

3 pounds ripe Anjou pears, peeled, cored, 
and cut into  -thick wedges 


3 ounces walnuts, broken into small pieces
(about 3/4 cup), toasted and cooled 


Juice of 1 lemon 

1/2 cup granulated sugar, plus more for 
sprinkling (or use sanding sugar) 


1/4 teaspoon salt 

3 tablespoons cornstarch 
2 tablespoons unsalted butter, cut into 
small pieces 
1 large egg yolk 


1 tablespoon heavy cream 

1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F, with a rack in the lower 
third. Bring the wine, figs, and star anise to a boil 
in a small saucepan over high heat. Reduce heat 
458 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


to medium-low; simmer until the figs are softened, 
10 to 12 minutes. Use a slotted spoon to transfer the 
figs to a large bowl. Cook the mixture in the pan 
over medium-high heat until reduced to a syrup, 
about 3 minutes; discard the star anise. Pour the 
syrup over the figs. 

2. Meanwhile, roll out 1 dough disk on floured 
parchment to make a 1  circle; start with pressure 
in the center and ease up just before reaching 
the edges. Drape the dough over the rolling pin; 
center over a 9-inch glass pie plate, and unroll. Gently 
push into the plate. Trim to leave a   overhang; 
refrigerate. Roll out the second disk. Cut out 
a vent with a cookie cutter, and refrigerate the cutout. 
3. Add the pears, nuts, lemon juice, sugar, salt, and 
cornstarch to the figs; stir until well combined. 
Spoon into the pie plate (pile high in the center). 
Dot with the butter; lightly brush the rim of the 
dough with water. Drape the second disk over 
the pin; center over the filling. Gently press around 
the filling to fit; trim to leave a   overhang. 
Fold the edge of the top crust under the bottom one; 
crimp to seal. Brush water on the bottom of the 
cutout; press onto the top crust. Beat the yolk with 
the cream; brush over the crust. Sprinkle with sugar; 
freeze until very firm, about 30 minutes. 
4. Bake on a baking sheet until just golden, 20 to 
25 minutes. Reduce heat to 375 degrees F. Bake, rotating 
halfway through, until bubbling, and the bottom 
crust is deep golden brown, about 1 hour. (If the 
edges brown too quickly, cover with a foil ring.) Let 
cool on a wire rack. 
pumpkin and ricotta crostata 

MAKES ONE 10-INCH CROSTATA 

1 disk Pasta Frolla (recipe follows) 
All-purpose flour, for dusting 


Unsalted butter, softened, for pie plate 
1 cup ricotta cheese, drained for 30 minutes 
in a cheesecloth-lined sieve set over a bowl 
1/2 cup mascarpone cheese 


1 can (15 ounces) solid-pack pumpkin 
5 tablespoons sugar 


1/4 teaspoon coarse salt 

Heaping 1/4 teaspoon freshly 

ground nutmeg 

1/2 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 

2 large egg yolks, lightly beaten 
2 tablespoons pine nuts 


1 large egg white, lightly beaten 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Bring the pasta frolla 
to room temperature. On a lightly floured surface, 
roll out the dough to 1/4 inch thick. Transfer to a 
lightly buttered 10-inch pie plate. Use your fingertips 
to press the dough against the bottom and 
sides of the dish until even. Trim the edges; refrigerate 
the scraps in plastic wrap until step 4. 
2. Prick the bottom of the pastry shell all over with 
a fork. Bake until set and pale golden brown, about 
15 minutes. Let cool on a wire rack. With a small 
knife, trim the edge of the shell where uneven to 
leave a   space between the shell and the top 
of the dish. 
3. Raise the oven temperature to 375 degrees F. Process the 
ricotta in a food processor until smooth. Add the 
mascarpone, pumpkin, sugar, salt, nutmeg, and 
vanilla; process until well combined, about 30 seconds. 
Add the yolks; process until combined, about 
10 seconds. Pour into the pastry shell. 
4. Tear the reserved chilled dough scraps into 1inch 
pieces. On a lightly floured surface, gently roll 
pieces with your hands to make  -thick ropes. 
Gently press 1 long rope around the top edge of the 
shell (patch 2 ropes together, if necessary). Gently 
place other pastry ropes on top of the filling to create 
a lattice pattern (ropes of all lengths can be 
used). Place 3 pine nuts in each square of lattice. 
Brush the latticework with egg white. 
5. Bake the crostata until the crust is golden brown 
and the filling is set, about 40 minutes. Let cool on 
a wire rack. 
PIES AND TARTS 459 


pasta frolla 


MAKES ENOUGH FOR TWO 10-INCH CROSTATA 

Pasta frolla (Italian for "short pastry") is the basic 
pastry dough of Italy. Our recipe yields enough 
dough for 2 crostata (you'll need to double the 
pumpkin and ricotta filling). 

21/4 cups all-purpose flour, plus more 
for dusting 

1/2 cup sugar 

1/8 teaspoon salt 

14 tablespoons (13/4 sticks) cold unsalted 
butter, cut into small pieces 


1 large egg, lightly beaten 
1 large egg yolk, lightly beaten 


1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 
1 tablespoon freshly grated lemon zest 


1. Pulse the flour, sugar, and salt in a food processor 
just until combined. Add the butter; pulse until 
the mixture resembles coarse meal, 6 to 8 times. 
2. Whisk together the egg, egg yolk, vanilla, and 
lemon zest. With the processor running, add the 
egg mixture; process just until the dough begins to 
come together. Turn the dough out onto a floured 
work surface; lightly knead to form a ball. 
3. Divide the dough into 2 pieces; gently press into 
flat disks. Wrap tightly in plastic. Refrigerate at least 
1 hour or overnight, or freeze up to 1 month. 
apple pie with cheddar crust 

MAKES ONE 10-INCH PIE 

Cheddar Crust dough (recipe follows) 

11/2 pounds Granny Smith apples (about 3), 
peeled, cored, and cut into  -thick 
wedges 

2 pounds Cortland apples (about 5), peeled, 
cored, and cut into  -thick wedges 

1 cup sugar 

1/2 cup all-purpose flour 
2 teaspoons fresh lemon juice 


3/4 teaspoon ground cinnamon 
1/4 teaspoon freshly grated nutmeg 
1/4 teaspoon salt 

1/8 teaspoon ground cloves 

2 tablespoons unsalted butter, cut into 
small pieces 


1 large egg, beaten 

1. Preheat the oven to 450 degrees F. Divide the dough into 
2 pieces. On a lightly floured work surface, roll out 
each to a 1  circle. 
2. Fit one circle into a 10-inch pie plate; transfer the 
plate to a baking sheet. Put the other circle on another 
baking sheet. Refrigerate the dough until cold, 
at least 30 minutes. 
3. Stir together the apples, sugar, flour, lemon juice, 
cinnamon, nutmeg, salt, and cloves. Spoon into the 
bottom pie crust. Dot the filling with butter. Cover 
with the top crust. Fold the edges over; crimp decoratively 
to seal. Cut a steam vent. Chill in the 
freezer until firm, about 30 minutes. 
4. Brush with egg. Bake the pie 10 minutes. Reduce 
the oven temperature to 350 degrees F; bake until golden 
brown, about 45 minutes. Tent with foil; bake until 
the juices are bubbling, about 45 minutes more. Let 
cool at least 11/2 hours before serving. 
cheddar crust 

MAKES ENOUGH FOR ONE 

10-INCH DOUBLE CRUST 

21/2 cups all-purpose flour, plus more 
for dusting 

1 teaspoon sugar 

1/2 teaspoon salt 

14 tablespoons (13/4 sticks) cold unsalted 
butter, cut into small pieces 


4 ounces white Cheddar cheese, coarsely 
grated (about 11/2 cups) 


1/2 cup ice water 

1. Process the flour, sugar, and salt in a food processor. 
Add the butter; pulse until pea-size lumps appear. 
Pulse in the cheese. With the processor 
running, add the ice water; process just until the 
dough comes together. 
2. Turn the dough out; gather into a block. Wrap 
in plastic wrap. Refrigerate until cold, at least 30 
minutes or up to 2 days. The dough can be frozen 
up to 3 weeks. 
460 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


apricot-pistachio tart 

MAKES ONE 9 x 17-INCH TART 

1 cup plus 1 tablespoon unsalted 
pistachios, shelled and toasted 


1/2 cup granulated sugar 

8 tablespoons (1 stick) cold unsalted butter, 
cut into   cubes 

1 large egg 

1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 

Pinch of salt 

All-purpose flour, for dusting 

1 box (171/4 ounces) puff pastry, thawed 
11/4 pounds apricots (about 6), cut 
into  -thick wedges 
1 large egg yolk 

1 tablespoon heavy cream 

2 tablespoons turbinado or other raw sugar 

1/4 cup apricot jam 

1. Process 1 cup nuts and the granulated sugar in 
a food processor to combine. Add the butter; 
process until a paste forms. Add the egg, vanilla, 
and salt; process to combine. Set aside. 
2. On a lightly floured surface, press the edges of 
both pastry sheets together to form one large sheet. 
Roll out to a 9 x 17-inch rectangle; transfer to a baking 
sheet. Spread the reserved pistachio mixture 
over the dough, leaving a   border. 
3. Position the rectangle so a short end is nearest 
you. Arrange the apricots on top in 4 vertical rows, 
alternating the direction in which apricots face from 
row to row. Fold in the edges of the dough; use your 
index finger to make a scalloped border. Refrigerate 
until cold, about 30 minutes. 
4. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Whisk together the 
yolk and cream; brush the egg wash over the edges 
of the tart shell. Chop the remaining tablespoon 
nuts; sprinkle the nuts and turbinado sugar over 
the apricots. Bake, rotating the sheet halfway 
through, until the crust is deep golden brown and 
the fruit is juicy, about 35 minutes. Let cool on a 
wire rack. 
5. Meanwhile, heat the jam with 11/2 tablespoons 
water in a small saucepan over low heat, stirring, 
until thinned, about 2 minutes. Pass through a fine 
sieve into a small bowl. Brush the glaze over the fruit. 
sweet cherry galette 

MAKES ONE 14-INCH TART 

All-purpose flour, for dusting 

Pate Sucree (page 651; do not divide 
dough into 2 pieces) 

1/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons sugar 

1/4 cup unsalted almonds, toasted and 
cooled 


1/4 teaspoon freshly grated nutmeg 
1/4 teaspoon salt 


11/2 pounds sweet cherries, such as Bing, 
pitted 

2 tablespoons cold unsalted butter, 
cut into small pieces 


1 large egg yolk 
1 tablespoon heavy cream 


1. On a piece of lightly floured parchment, roll out 
the dough to a 16-inch-long oval (1/4 inch thick). 
Transfer the dough and parchment to a baking 
sheet. Refrigerate until cold, about 30 minutes. 
2. Process 1/4 cup sugar and the almonds, nutmeg, 
and salt in a food processor to combine. Gently toss 
with the cherries. 
3. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees  F. Spoon the cherries 
over the dough, leaving a   border. Dot with 
butter. Fold in the edges, pressing gently. Refrigerate 
until cold, 30 minutes. 
4. Whisk the yolk with the cream; brush over the 
edges of the tart. Sprinkle with the remaining 2 tablespoons 
sugar (or to taste). Bake until golden, 
45 to 50 minutes. 
PIES AND TARTS 461 


panna cotta tartlets 
with strawberries 

MAKES SIX 4-INCH TARTLETS 

If your strawberries are sweet, you won't need as 
much sugar-use an amount at the lower end of 
our range in step 5. 

21/2 teaspoons unflavored gelatin 

Vegetable oil, for brushing 
21/2 cups heavy cream 

3/4 cup sugar, plus 2 tablespoons, if needed 
1/2 cup creme fraiche 
1/2 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 
Pate Sucree (page 651) 


All-purpose flour, for dusting 
1 pound strawberries, hulled and halved 
lengthwise, or quartered, if large 
1 teaspoon balsamic vinegar 


1. In a small bowl, sprinkle the gelatin over 3 tablespoons 
cold water; let soften 10 minutes. Brush 
the insides of 6 5-ounce ramekins or custard cups 
(31/4 inches in diameter) with oil. 
2. Bring the cream and 1/2 cup plus 2 tablespoons 
sugar to a simmer in a medium saucepan over 
medium heat, stirring occasionally. Reduce heat 
to medium-low; add the gelatin mixture. Cook, stirring, 
until the gelatin and sugar are dissolved. Remove 
from heat. Whisk in the creme fraiche and 
vanilla. Pour into a medium bowl set in an ice-water 
bath. Let cool completely, stirring occasionally. Divide 
the mixture among the ramekins. Refrigerate 
until set, about 3 hours, or up to 1 day. 
3. Line a rimmed baking sheet with parchment, and 
place 6 4-inch tart rings on top. Divide the dough 
into 6 pieces. One at a time, roll out each piece into 
a 7-inch circle (. inch thick) on a lightly floured 
surface. Press each into a tart ring; trim flush with 
the top edge of the ring. Refrigerate the tart shells 
until cold, about 30 minutes. 
4. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Prick the bottoms of 
the tart shells all over with fork. Line each with 
parchment, and fill with pie weights or dried beans. 
Bake until the edges are golden, about 18 minutes. 
Remove the parchment and weights; continue baking 
until the surfaces are golden, about 10 minutes. 
Let cool on a wire rack. 

5. Heat the berries, remaining 2 to 4 tablespoons 
sugar (depending on the sweetness of the berries), 
and vinegar in a skillet over medium-low heat, stirring, 
until juicy, about 5 minutes. Let cool slightly. 
6. Unmold the panna cottas: Dip the ramekins in 
warm water; pat dry. Run a small knife around the 
edge of each panna cotta; gently coax, and invert 
onto a tart shell. Top with berries and sauce. 
sugar plum tart 

MAKES ONE 10-INCH TART 

1 disk Pate Sablee (page 654) 
Almond Frangipane (page 655) 


1 pound 2 ounces sugar plums or other 
small plums, halved crosswise and pitted 

3 tablespoons turbinado or other raw sugar 

Confectioners' sugar, for dusting 

1. Press the dough into a 10-inch round tart pan with 
a removable bottom. Refrigerate 10 minutes. Trim 
the dough flush with the top edge of the pan. Refrigerate 
until cold, about 30 minutes. 
2. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Line the tart shell with 
parchment, and fill with pie weights or dried beans. 
Bake until the edges are golden, about 10 minutes. 
Remove the parchment and weights; continue baking 
until the surface is golden, about 10 minutes. 
Let cool on a wire rack. 
3. Spread the frangipane in the shell. Arrange the 
plums, cut sides up, on top in concentric circles, 
pressing gently. Sprinkle with turbinado sugar. 
Bake until golden, 45 to 50 minutes. Let cool on a 
wire rack. Just before serving, dust the tart with confectioners' 
sugar. 
462 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


blueberry-lemon tart 

MAKES ONE 9-INCH TART 

1 disk Pate Sablee (page 654) 

1/2 cup sugar 

3 tablespoons all-purpose flour, 
plus more for dusting 


2 pinches of salt 
1 cup low-fat buttermilk 


2 large eggs, separated, room temperature 
1/2 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 


1 tablespoon freshly grated lemon zest 
2 teaspoons fresh lemon juice 


Pinch of cream of tartar 
2 cups blueberries, picked over 


1 tablespoon honey 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees  F. Place a 9-inch cake 
ring on a rimmed baking sheet lined with parchment. 
Roll out the dough between sheets of parchment 
to an 1  circle (. inch thick). Refrigerate 
15 minutes. Peel off the parchment; press the dough 
into the ring. Trim flush with the top edge of the 
ring. Refrigerate until cold, about 30 minutes. 
2. Prick the dough all over with a fork. Line the tart 
shell with parchment, and fill with pie weights or 
dried beans. Bake until the crust starts to turn 
golden, 20 to 25 minutes. Remove the parchment 
and weights; continue baking until pale golden, 
about 5 minutes more. Let cool on a wire rack. 
3. Whisk together 1/4 cup sugar, the flour, and a 
pinch of salt; set aside. Whisk the buttermilk and 
yolks in a small saucepan over medium-low heat; 
gradually whisk in the sugar mixture. Cook, whisking 
constantly, until thickened, 5 to 7 minutes. Stir 
in the vanilla, zest, and juice. Transfer to a medium 
bowl set in an ice-water bath. Let cool completely, 
stirring occasionally. 
4. Meanwhile, put the whites and cream of tartar in 
the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the whisk 
attachment. Add a pinch of salt. Beat on low speed 
until foamy. With the mixer running, gradually add 
the remaining 1/4 cup sugar. On medium-high 
speed, beat until stiff, glossy peaks form. 
5. Gently fold the pastry cream and 1 cup berries 
into the meringue. Pour the mixture into the tart 
shell, making swirls and peaks. Bake until golden, 
40 to 45 minutes. Let cool on a wire rack. Remove 
the cake ring. 
6. Meanwhile, heat the remaining cup berries and 
the honey in a medium skillet over medium-low 
heat, stirring gently, until just warm, about 2 minutes. 
Spoon the glazed berries over the tart. 
fig and grape tart 

MAKES ONE 4 x 14-INCH TART 

Pate Sablee (page 654; do not divide 

dough into 2 pieces) 

1 cup Almond Frangipane (page 655) 

4 ounces figs (about 4), halved lengthwise, 
or quartered, if large 


1/3 cup black seedless grapes, halved 

1 tablespoon turbinado or other raw sugar 
Gorgonzola dolce, for serving 


1. Press the dough into a 4 x 14-inch rectangular 
tart pan with a removable bottom. Refrigerate 10 
minutes. Trim the dough flush with the top edge of 
the pan. Refrigerate until cold, about 30 minutes. 
2. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Line the tart shell with 
parchment, and fill with pie weights or dried beans. 
Bake until the edges are golden, about 15 minutes. 
Remove the parchment and weights; continue baking 
until the surface is golden, about 10 minutes. 
Let cool on a wire rack. 
3. Spread the frangipane in the tart shell. Arrange 
the figs and grapes on top, pressing gently. Sprinkle 
with the sugar. Bake until golden, 40 to 45 minutes. 
Let cool on a rack. Serve with Gorgonzola dolce. 
PIES AND TARTS 463 


strawberry tartlets 

MAKES SIX 4-INCH TARTLETS 

This dough can be frozen for up to 1 month; thaw 
in the refrigerator before using. Allow guests to 
fill their own tarts at the table. 

1 cup plus 2 tablespoons all-purpose flour 

11/2 tablespoons plus 3 tablespoons sugar 
1/2 teaspoon salt 

1/2 cup (1 stick) chilled unsalted butter, 
cut into small pieces 


1 large egg yolk, lightly beaten 

1 tablespoon ice water, plus more 
as needed 


11/2 pounds (2 pints) fresh strawberries, 
hulled, washed, and halved, or 
quartered, if large 

2 cups creme fraiche 

1. Pulse the flour, 11/2 tablespoons sugar, and salt 
in a food processor to combine. Add the butter; 
process until the mixture resembles coarse meal. 
2. In a small bowl, mix together the egg yolk and 
ice water. With the machine running, add the egg 
mixture in a slow, steady stream through the feed 
tube. Process until the dough just holds together, 
about 20 seconds. If the dough feels dry, add more 
ice water, 1 tablespoon at a time. 
3. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Divide the dough 
evenly among 6 4-inch tartlet pans; gently press 
into the pans. Prick the bottoms with a fork. Refrigerate 
the shells until firm to the touch, at least 
30 minutes. 
4. Line each shell with foil, and fill with pie weights 
or dried beans. Place the tart pans on a rimmed baking 
sheet; bake until the edges just begin to brown, 
about 15 minutes. Remove the foil and weights. 
Continue to bake until the bottom of the crust is 
golden brown and crisp, about 10 minutes more. 
Transfer to a wire rack; let cool completely. Remove 
the shells from the pans. 

5. Meanwhile, in a medium bowl, mix the strawberries 
with the remaining 3 tablespoons sugar. 
Cover with plastic wrap, and let macerate until juicy, 
about 1 hour. 
6. When ready to serve, fill each tart shell with 
about 1/3 cup creme fraiche; divide the strawberries 
evenly among the tarts. 
buttermilk pie 

MAKES ONE 10-INCH PIE 

Graham Cracker-Coated Piecrust 
(recipe follows) 


3 cups buttermilk 

1/2 cup (1 stick) unsalted butter, 
melted and cooled 


8 large egg yolks 
2 teaspoons pure vanilla extract 


2 cups sugar 

1/2 cup all-purpose flour, plus more 
for the work surface 


1/2 teaspoon salt 
1 tablespoon finely grated lemon zest 


Blackberry and Blueberry Sauce 
(recipe follows) 


1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Prick the bottom of 
the pie shell all over with a fork. Line with foil; fill 
with dried beans or pie weights. Bake until the 
edges are lightly browned, about 25 minutes. Remove 
the foil and weights, and bake until the crust 
is lightly browned, about 10 minutes more. Let cool 
completely on a wire rack. 
2. Reduce the oven heat to 350 degrees F. In a medium 
bowl, whisk together the buttermilk, butter, egg 
yolks, and vanilla. In a large bowl, combine the 
sugar, flour, and salt. Whisk into the dry ingredients. 
Pass through a fine sieve into a clean bowl. 
Whisk in the lemon zest. 
3. Pour the mixture into the pie shell; bake until the 
center is just set, about 1 hour and 10 minutes. Let 
cool, and then refrigerate at least 4 hours. Serve cold 
with berry sauce. 
464 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


graham cracker-coated piecrust 

MAKES ENOUGH FOR ONE 10-INCH PIE 

11/4 cups all-purpose flour, plus more 
for the work surface 

3/4 teaspoon salt 
1/2 cup (1 stick) unsalted butter, 
cut into pieces 


1/4 cup ice water 
4 graham crackers, finely ground (1/2 cup) 


1. Pulse the flour and salt in a food processor to 
combine. Add the butter, and process until the mixture 
resembles coarse meal, about 10 seconds. With 
the machine running, add the ice water 1 tablespoon 
at a time, and process just until the dough holds together, 
no more than 30 seconds. 
2. Turn out the dough onto a lightly floured work 
surface. Flatten the dough into a disk; wrap in plastic. 
Refrigerate at least 1 hour. 
3. Spread the crumbs on a clean work surface. Roll 
out the dough on top of the crumbs, coating both 
sides, into a 14-inch round about 1/8 inch thick. Gently 
fit the dough into a 10 x   (11/2 quart) pie 
plate, and crimp the edges as desired. Refrigerate 
the shell at least 30 minutes before baking. 
blackberry and blueberry sauce 

MAKES 4 CUPS 

1/2 cup sugar 

1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice 

2 pints fresh blueberries 

2 containers (6 ounces each) fresh 
blackberries 


1 teaspoon cornstarch 

1. In a medium saucepan set over medium heat, stir 
together the sugar, lemon juice, and half the blueberries 
and blackberries. Bring just to a boil. Reduce 
heat to low, and simmer until the blueberries 
burst and release their juices, about 3 minutes. 
2. In a small bowl, dissolve the cornstarch in 1 teaspoon 
cold water. Stir into the sauce. Simmer, stirring, 
about 1 minute more, until the sauce thickens 
slightly. Remove from the heat; stir in the remaining 
berries. Transfer the sauce to a serving bowl. 
Chill until cold; stir before serving with the pie. 
joey gallagher's 
apricot hand pies 

MAKES 12 

All-purpose flour, for the work surface 

Martha's Perfect Pate Brisee (page 647) 
12 Poached Apricot Halves (page 443) 


3 tablespoons sugar 

1. Line a baking sheet with parchment paper; set 
aside. On a lightly floured surface, roll one disk of 
dough into a large round, about 1/8 inch thick. Using 
a   cookie cutter, cut out 12 rounds. Transfer 
rounds to the prepared baking sheet; refrigerate 
until chilled, about 30 minutes. 
2. Repeat process with the remaining dough, using 
a 4-inch cookie cutter to make 12 more rounds; do 
not refrigerate. Remove disks from refrigerator. 
3. Using paper towels, blot the poached apricots 
halves to eliminate excess liquid; place one in center 
of each chilled round. Brush cold water around 
edges of dough; cover each with an unchilled round. 
Gently press edges together to seal. Refrigerate 
about 30 minutes. 
4. Preheat the oven to 425 degrees F. Remove tarts from refrigerator. 
Using a paring knife, slash the top of each 
tart in a crosshatch fashion. Brush with water, and 
generously sprinkle with sugar. 
5. Bake 15 minutes. Reduce oven heat to 350 degrees F. Continue 
baking until golden brown, 15 to 20 minutes 
more. Transfer pies to a wire rack to cool slightly 
before serving. Or let cool completely, and store in 
an airtight container at room temperature up to 
4 days. 
PIES AND TARTS 465 


prune tart 

MAKES ONE 12 x 18-INCH TART 

Serve with creme fraiche or whipped cream. 

2 cups red wine 

2/3 cup fresh orange juice 
1/2 cup plus 2 tablespoons sugar 


1 cinnamon stick 
3 cups (1 pound) pitted prunes, halved 


1 sheet frozen puff pastry, thawed 
Finely grated zest of 1 orange 


1 large egg 
1 tablespoon heavy cream 


1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. In a medium saucepan, 
bring the wine, orange juice, 1/2 cup sugar, and cinnamon 
to a boil over high heat. Remove from heat; 
add the prunes, and let steep 10 minutes. Use a slotted 
spoon to transfer the prunes to a bowl. Return 
the liquid to a boil; cook until slightly reduced and 
thickened, 10 to 12 minutes. Remove from heat. 
2. Meanwhile, roll out the puff pastry into a 12 x 
18-inch rectangle. In a small bowl, combine the remaining 
2 tablespoons sugar and the orange zest; 
sprinkle evenly over the pastry. Arrange the prunes 
in rows over the pastry, leaving a   border on 
all sides. In a small bowl, whisk together the egg 
and cream; brush on the edges of the pastry. 
3. Bake until the crust is golden, about 20 minutes, 
rotating the pan and brushing the tart with reserved 
cooking liquid halfway through. Remove from the 
oven; let cool slightly. Serve warm. 
fresh cherry pie 

MAKES ONE 9-INCH PIE 

All-purpose flour, for work surface 

Martha's Perfect Pate Brisee (page 647) 
21/4 pounds fresh yellow and red sweet 
cherries, pitted and halved 
1/4 cup sugar 

2 tablespoons instant tapioca powder 
Vanilla ice cream, for serving (optional) 


1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. On a lightly floured 
work surface, roll out 1 disk pate brisee to a  thick 
round, about 13 inches in diameter. Fit the 
dough in a 9-inch pie plate. 
2. In a large bowl, combine the cherries, sugar, and 
tapioca, and toss to coat evenly. Pour the filling into 
the prepared pie plate, and set aside. 
3. Roll out the remaining disk of dough as in step 
1. Using a pastry wheel or a sharp paring knife, cut 
the dough into  -wide strips. Lightly brush the 
rim of the dough in the pie plate with water, and 
weave the strips of dough on top of the filling to 
form a lattice. Using kitchen scissors, trim the strips 
to create a   overhang. Tuck the strips under 
the rim of shell, and crimp to seal. Chill the pie in 
the refrigerator at least 30 minutes. 
4. Bake the pie 20 minutes. Reduce the oven heat 
to 350 degrees F; bake until the crust is deep golden brown 
and the juices begin to bubble, 40 to 50 minutes 
more. Transfer the pie to a wire rack, and let stand 
until just warm or room temperature. Serve with ice 
cream, if desired. 
rhubarb pie 

MAKES ONE 9  DEEP-DISH PIE 

2 pounds rhubarb, trimmed and cut 
into   pieces (about 61/2 cups) 


11/3 cups granulated sugar 
1/4 cup cornstarch 

Pinch of coarse salt 

1 teaspoon finely grated lemon zest 
plus 1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice 


All-purpose flour, for work surface 

Flaky Piecrust (recipe follows) 

2 tablespoons unsalted butter, 
cut into pieces 


1 tablespoon heavy cream 

1 large egg yolk 

Fine sanding sugar, for sprinkling 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F, with a rack in lower 
third. Stir together the rhubarb, granulated sugar, 
cornstarch, salt, and lemon zest and juice in a large 
bowl; set aside. 
466 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


2. On a lightly floured surface, roll out 1 piece of 
dough to a 1  round, about 1/8 inch thick. Fit 
into a 9  deep-dish glass pie plate. Fill with 
rhubarb mixture, and dot with butter. Refrigerate. 
3. On a lightly floured surface, roll out remaining 
dough to a 1  round. Drape over filling. Trim 
edge to 1 inch. Fold edge under, and crimp as desired. 
Make five 21/2- to   slits in crust to vent. 
Refrigerate 15 minutes. 
4. Whisk cream and egg yolk in a small bowl. Brush 
over crust. Sprinkle with sanding sugar. Bake until 
bottom crust is golden and filling is bubbling vigorously, 
1 hour 10 minutes to 1 hour 25 minutes. 
Cover with foil if browning too quickly. Let cool at 
least 4 hours on a wire rack. 
flaky piecrust 

MAKES ENOUGH FOR ONE 9  

DOUBLE-CRUST PIE OR 

TWO 9- TO 10-INCH SINGLE-CRUST PIES 

3 cups all-purpose flour 

1 tablespoon sugar 
11/4 teaspoons salt 

3/4 cup (11/2 sticks) cold unsalted butter, 
cut into pieces 
6 tablespoons cold vegetable shortening 
or lard, cut into pieces 


1/2 cup ice water, plus more if needed 

1. Pulse flour, sugar, and salt in a food processor. 
Add butter and shortening, and process until mixture 
resembles coarse meal, about 10 seconds. Add 
water in a slow, steady stream just until dough holds 
together, no longer than 30 seconds (do not over-
process). Squeeze a small amount of dough; if it 
doesn't hold together, add more water. 
2. Remove dough from processor, and knead once 
or twice. Divide in half; shape into disks. Wrap each 
in plastic; refrigerate until firm, 1 hour or overnight. 
tangerine chiffon pie 

MAKES ONE 10-INCH PIE 

2 cups store-bought tangerine-orange 
juice blend 


3 cups finely ground store-bought 
shortbread cookies (about 12 ounces) 


5 teaspoons finely grated lemon zest 
plus 3 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 


1 cup sugar 

1/4 cup (1/2 stick) unsalted butter, melted 
2 teaspoons unflavored gelatin 


4 large eggs, separated, room temperature 
1/8 teaspoon cream of tartar 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Boil the tangerine-
orange juice in a small saucepan over medium-high 
heat until it has reduced to about 1 cup, 18 to 20 minutes. 
Remove from heat; set aside. 
2. Pulse cookies, 1 tablespoon lemon zest, and 
1/4 cup sugar in a food processor until thoroughly 
combined. With processor running, add melted butter; 
process until combined. Press cookie mixture 
evenly into bottom, up sides, and onto rim of a 10inch 
pie plate. Bake until golden brown, about 15 
minutes. Transfer to a wire rack to cool completely. 
3. Put lemon juice into a small bowl. Sprinkle with 
gelatin. Let soften 10 minutes. Meanwhile, whisk 
together yolks, 1/2 cup sugar, the juice reduction, and 
the remaining 2 teaspoons zest in a medium 
saucepan. Cook over medium-low heat, stirring constantly, 
until thickened, about 10 minutes (do not 
let boil). Remove from heat. Add gelatin mixture, 
and whisk until gelatin has dissolved completely. 
4. Transfer gelatin mixture to a large bowl. Refrigerate, 
stirring occasionally, until cool and thick 
enough to hold a ribbon on surface, 25 to 30 minutes. 
5. Put egg whites and cream of tartar into the bowl 
of an electric mixer fitted with the whisk attachment; 
beat on medium-high speed until soft peaks 
form. Gradually add remaining 1/4 cup sugar; beat 
until stiff but not dry peaks form. Fold egg-white 
mixture into gelatin mixture in 3 batches, folding 
until just combined after each addition. Pour into 
cooled crust. Refrigerate until set, at least 2 hours 
or overnight, before serving. 
PIES AND TARTS 467 


lemon tartlets 
with meringue caps 


MAKES ABOUT 20 

for the shells 

1/4 cup (1/2 stick) unsalted butter, melted 
2/3 cup confectioners' sugar, sifted 


2 large egg whites, room temperature 
1/2 cup sifted all-purpose flour 
1/2 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 


for the meringue caps 

3 large egg whites, room temperature 

1/2 cup granulated sugar 

for the lemon curd 

6 large egg yolks 

1 tablespoon finely grated lemon zest 
plus 1/2 cup fresh lemon juice (about 3 
lemons total) 


3/4 cup granulated sugar 
Pinch of salt 
1/2 cup (1 stick) cold unsalted butter, 
cut into pieces 


1. Preheat the oven to 325 degrees F. Make the shells: Put 
butter and sugar into the bowl of an electric mixer 
fitted with the paddle attachment; mix on medium-
high speed until pale and fluffy. Mix in egg whites, 
1 at a time. Mix in flour and vanilla. 
2. Spoon 1 scant teaspoon batter onto a rimmed 
baking sheet lined with a nonstick baking mat. 
Using the back of the spoon, spread into a   
round. Repeat 4 times. Bake until golden, 10 to 12 
minutes. Immediately transfer cookies, 1 at a time, 
to inverted small tartlet shells or brioche molds; 
gently press to shape. Let set, about 30 seconds. If 
cookies become too cool to shape, return them to 
the oven for 20 seconds. Repeat with remaining batter. 
(The shells can be stored in an airtight container 
for up to 3 days at room temperature.) 
3. Reduce oven temperature to 200 degrees  F. Make the 
meringue caps: Put egg whites and sugar into the 
bowl of an electric mixer set over a pan of simmering 
water; whisk until sugar has dissolved. Attach 
bowl to mixer fitted with the whisk attachment; 
beat on medium-high speed until stiff peaks form 
and meringue is cool, about 10 minutes. Transfer 
to a pastry bag fitted with a 7/16-inch star tip (such 
as Ateco #825). Pipe twenty 1 -round,  high 
spirals onto baking sheets lined with parchment, 
spacing about 1 inch apart. Bake 20 minutes. 
Reduce oven temperature to 150 degrees F. Bake until dry 
but not brown, about 2 hours more. Transfer 
meringues to a wire rack; let cool completely. (The 
meringues can be stored in an airtight container 
up to 3 days.) 

4. Make the curd: Whisk egg yolks, lemon zest and 
juice, and sugar in a heavy, medium saucepan. 
Cook, stirring constantly, over medium-low heat 
until mixture registers 160 degrees F on a candy thermometer, 
8 to 10 minutes. Remove from heat. Stir 
in salt. Add butter, 1 piece at a time, stirring after 
each addition until smooth. Pour curd through a 
fine sieve into a medium bowl. Cover with plastic 
wrap, pressing it directly onto surface. Refrigerate 
until cold and set, at least 1 hour (up to 2 days). 
5. To serve, spoon 2 teaspoons curd into each shell. 
Top each with a meringue cap. 
honey-walnut pie 

SERVES 8 TO 10 

3 tablespoons all-purpose flour, plus more 
for work surface 


Pate Sucree Walnut Variation (page 651) 

4 large eggs, lightly beaten, plus 1 lightly 
beaten egg for brushing 


3/4 cup acacia or other mild honey 
3/4 cup granulated sugar 
1/4 cup (1/2 stick) unsalted butter, melted 

1/2 teaspoon finely grated orange zest, plus 
1/4 cup fresh orange juice 


1/2 teaspoon salt 
2 cups coarsely chopped walnuts 


Fine sanding sugar, for sprinkling 

468 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Place a 91/8 x 1  
tart ring on a baking sheet lined with parchment; 
set aside. On a lightly floured surface, roll out 1 disk 
of dough to 1/8 inch thick; cut into a 14-inch round. 
Fit into tart ring; trim overhang to 1/2 inch. Refrigerate 
while making filling. 
2. Whisk together 4 eggs, the honey, granulated 
sugar, butter, orange zest and juice, salt, and flour 
in a large bowl. Stir in walnuts. Pour into tart shell. 
3. On a lightly floured surface, roll out remaining 
disk of dough to 1/8 inch thick. Cut into an 1  
round. Cut five slits for vents. Drape over filling. 
Trim overhang to 1 inch; fold over bottom crust. 
Press edges to seal; tuck into ring. Brush with remaining 
beaten egg, sprinkle with sanding sugar. 
4. Bake until a knife inserted in one of the vents 
comes out clean, 45 to 50 minutes. Transfer sheet to 
a wire rack; let cool completely. Remove ring before 
serving. The pie can be stored, covered, overnight. 
mini cranberry meringue pies 

MAKES 12 

If you can't find blood oranges, use regular ones. 

All-purpose flour, for work surface 

1 disk Pate Sucree Citrus Variation 
(page 651) 


31/4 cups fresh cranberries (12 ounces) 
11/2 cups sugar 

11/2 teaspoons finely chopped lemon zest 

1 teaspoon finely chopped blood orange 
zest, plus 1/4 cup blood orange juice 


1/4 teaspoon salt 
1/8 teaspoon ground cinnamon 


Pinch of ground cloves 
3 tablespoons cornstarch 


3 large egg whites 
Pinch of cream of tartar 


1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. On a lightly floured 
surface, roll out dough to 1/8 inch thick. Cut out 4.inch 
fluted rounds, and fit into cups of a standard 
12-cup muffin tin (not nonstick). Pierce bottoms 
with tines of a fork. Freeze 15 minutes. 
2. Line each shell with parchment paper, and fill 
with pie weights or dried beans. Bake 15 minutes. 
Remove weights and parchment. Return to oven; 
bake until bottoms are just turning golden, 5 minutes 
more. Transfer to wire racks; let cool 5 minutes. 
Remove shells from the tin; let cool completely. 
3. Bring 2 cups cranberries, 1 cup sugar, and 11/2 cups 
water to a boil in a medium saucepan. Reduce heat, 
and simmer mixture, stirring occasionally, until 
cranberries have burst, about 5 minutes. Pour 
through a coarse sieve, then a fine sieve; discard 
solids. (You should have about 13/4 cups; if you have 
less, add water.) 
4. Bring strained cranberry juice, 1/4 cup sugar, the 
zests, salt, cinnamon, cloves, and remaining 11/4 cups 
cranberries to a boil in a medium saucepan, stirring 
occasionally. Reduce heat; simmer, stirring occasionally, 
until cranberries are soft but have not 
burst, about 3 minutes. 
5. Meanwhile, stir cornstarch, blood orange juice, 
and 1/4 cup water in a bowl; whisk into cranberry 
mixture. Bring to a boil, stirring constantly. Cook, 
stirring, until translucent, about 1 minute. Divide 
among prepared shells. Refrigerate until set, about 
1 hour (up to overnight). 
6. Preheat the broiler. Put egg whites and remaining 
1/4 cup sugar into the heatproof bowl of an electric 
mixer set over a pan of simmering water; whisk 
until sugar has dissolved and mixture is hot to the 
touch. Attach to mixer fitted with the whisk attachment; 
beat on medium speed until foamy. Raise 
speed to high. Add cream of tartar; beat until 
medium, glossy peaks form. Divide the meringue 
evenly among pies. 
7. Set pies under broiler until tops are browned, 30 
seconds to 1 minute. 
PIES AND TARTS 469 


pear-sour cherry flat pie 

MAKES ONE 71/2 x 10-INCH 

DOUBLE-CRUST PIE 

All-purpose flour, for work surface 

14 ounces best-quality frozen puff pastry 
(such as Dufour), thawed 


3 small or 2 medium Bartlett pears (about 1 
pound 2 ounces), peeled, halved, cored, 
and cut into   slices 

2 ounces dried sour cherries 

1/3 cup sugar, plus more for sprinkling 
4 teaspoons cornstarch 


1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice 
Salt and freshly ground pepper 


Five-spice powder 
1 large egg, lightly beaten 


1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. On a lightly floured 
surface, unfold the dough, and roll out to 10 x 15 
inches. Cut into two 71/2 x 10-inch rectangles. Place 
on baking sheets; refrigerate until cold. 
2. Stir pears, cherries, sugar, cornstarch, lemon juice, 
and 1/8 teaspoon each of salt, pepper, and spice powder 
in a bowl. 
3. Transfer 1 rectangle of dough to a baking sheet 
lined with parchment. Spoon fruit mixture onto 
dough, leaving a   border all around. Brush 
border with beaten egg. Lay remaining dough over 
filling; press gently to seal. Refrigerate 20 minutes. 
Transfer to a room-temperature rimmed baking 
sheet lined with parchment. 
4. Trim edges, and brush top with beaten egg. Cut 
five   vents in top. Sprinkle with sugar. Bake, 
rotating once, until crust is golden and juices are 
bubbling, about 35 minutes. Transfer the pie to a 
wire rack; let cool 20 minutes before serving. 
yogurt-plum pie 

MAKES ONE 9-INCH PIE 

Graham Crust (recipe follows) 

2 cups whole-milk Greek yogurt 
1/2 vanilla bean, seeds scraped and reserved 


1/2 teaspoon finely grated lemon zest 
1/4 cup (1/2 stick) unsalted butter, melted 


4 large egg yolks 
1 cup sugar 


1/4 cup all-purpose flour 
1/4 teaspoon salt 


1 cup Plum-Vanilla Jam (recipe follows) 
or best-quality store-bought plum jam 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Press crust mixture 
into the bottom and up the sides of a 9-inch pie plate. 
Freeze 15 minutes. Cover edge with foil. Bake until 
beginning to dry out, about 15 minutes. Transfer to 
a wire rack; let cool completely. (Leave oven on.) 
2. Stir yogurt, vanilla seeds, and zest in a bowl. Stir 
in butter and yolks. Stir sugar, flour, and salt in a 
bowl; stir into yogurt mixture until smooth. Pour 
into crust. 
3. Bake, with foil covering edge of crust, until just 
set in center, 45 to 55 minutes. Transfer to a wire 
rack; let cool 1 hour. Spread jam over center of pie. 
Refrigerate at least 3 hours (up to overnight). 
graham crust 

MAKES ENOUGH FOR ONE 

9- OR 10-INCH PIE 

2/3 cup all-purpose flour 

1/3 cup whole-wheat flour 
3 tablespoons wheat germ 


1/2 teaspoon salt 
1/4 teaspoon ground cinnamon 


1/2 cup (1 stick) unsalted butter, softened 
1/3 cup packed light-brown sugar 


Pulse the flours, wheat germ, salt, and cinnamon 
in a food processor to combine. Add the butter 
and sugar; process until dough just holds together. 
Use immediately. 

470 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


plum-vanilla jam 

MAKES 13/4 CUPS 

11/2 pounds red plums, halved, pitted, 
and coarsely chopped 

11/2 cups sugar 

3 strips (21/2 inches) lemon zest, plus 
1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice 


Pinch of salt 
1/2 vanilla bean, seeds scraped and reserved 


Bring all ingredients to a boil in a large stockpot, 
mashing with a potato masher. Cook, stirring frequently, 
until mixture is the consistency of very 
thick honey, 5 to 10 minutes. Remove plum skin if 
desired. Discard vanilla bean and zest. Do not 
strain; jam should be chunky. Refrigerate in an airtight 
container up to 1 month. 

pithiviers 

MAKES ONE 9-INCH TART 

This classic tart, essentially a frangipane filling 
enclosed between two layers of puff pastry, is 
named for the French town in which it was created. 
We recommend using an insulated baking 
sheet instead of a regular baking sheet to prevent 
the bottom of the pastry from getting too 
browned during baking. 

2/3 cup whole blanched almonds 

1/2 cup sugar 
3 large egg yolks 


3 tablespoons chilled unsalted butter, 
cut into   pieces 


2 tablespoons light rum 
All-purpose flour, for work surface 


1 pound Puff Pastry dough (page 653), or 
best-quality frozen puff pastry (such as 
Dufour), thawed 


1 tablespoon heavy cream 

1. Make the frangipane: In the bowl of a food processor 
fitted with the metal blade, process the almonds 
and sugar until the mixture is very fine crumbs. 
With the machine running, add 2 egg yolks, butter, 
and rum; continue processing until the mixture 
is smooth and combined. 
2. On a lightly floured work surface, roll out the pastry 
dough into a rectangle at least 91/4 x 181/2 inches 
and about 1/8 inch thick. Using a 9-inch round cake 
pan as a guide, cut out 2 9-inch rounds. 
3. In a small bowl, whisk together the remaining 
egg yolk and cream for the egg wash. Place 1 round 
on a baking sheet, and spread the almond mixture 
on top, leaving a   border all around; brush the 
border with egg wash. Using an aspic or cookie cutter, 
cut a   hole in the center of the remaining 
round; place the cut round on top of the other round, 
pressing lightly around the filling to seal the rounds 
together. Place in the refrigerator 1 hour. 
4. Preheat the oven to 425 degrees F. Remove the tart from 
the refrigerator; using a small paring knife, score 
the top by making curved lines from the center 
to the edges, like a pinwheel. Brush the top of the 
tart with the egg wash, being careful not to let any 
excess drip over the cut edge of dough, as it will inhibit 
proper rising. Return to the refrigerator to chill 
again, if needed. 
5. Place the baking sheet in the oven, and bake 30 
minutes. Reduce heat to 375 degrees  F; loosely cover the 
tart with aluminum foil, and continue baking 30 
minutes more. 
6. Transfer to a wire rack, and let sit 20 minutes. Remove 
the tart from the pan by sliding it onto a serving 
platter. Serve warm or at room temperature, cut 
into wedges. 
PIES AND TARTS 471 


pumpkin-pecan pie 

MAKES ONE 9-INCH PIE 

1 disk Martha's Perfect Pate Brisee 
(page 647) 


1 151/2-ounce can pumpkin puree 

3/4 cup granulated sugar 
1/2 teaspoon salt 
1 teaspoon ground ginger 


1/2 teaspoon ground nutmeg 
3 large eggs 


3/4 cup plus 1 tablespoon heavy cream 
1/2 cup milk 
1/4 cup bourbon 
2/3 cup packed dark-brown sugar 


3 tablespoons melted butter 

1 cup coarsely chopped pecans, plus 
halves for garnish 


Whipped cream or vanilla ice cream, 
for serving (optional) 

1. Preheat the oven to 425 degrees  F. Remove the dough 
from the refrigerator, and place it between 2 pieces 
of plastic wrap. Roll out to a 1  round. Remove 
and discard the plastic, and fit the dough into a 9inch 
Pyrex or ceramic pie plate; trim the dough 
evenly along the outside edge, leaving about a 1/2inch 
overhang all around. Crimp the edge, as desired. 
Prick the bottom of the dough all over with a fork. 
Place in the freezer until firm, about 15 minutes. 
2. Remove from the freezer, and line with parchment 
paper or aluminum foil. Fill with pie weights 
or dried beans, and bake until the edge are starting 
to turn golden, about 15 minutes. Remove the paper 
and weights, and continue baking until the center 
is lightly browned, about 5 minutes more. Remove 
from the oven. Reduce the oven heat to 350 degrees F. 
3. Meanwhile, in a large bowl, combine the pumpkin 
puree, granulated sugar, salt, ginger, nutmeg, 
eggs, 3/4 cup cream, milk, and bourbon; whisk until 
well combined. 
4. Fill the prepared pie shell with the pumpkin mixture, 
and return to the oven. Bake until the filling is 
set around the edges but still slightly soft in the 
center, about 55 minutes. Remove from the oven; 
let cool. The filling will continue to firm as it cools. 
5. Heat the broiler. In a small bowl, combine the 
brown sugar, melted butter, remaining tablespoon 
cream, and chopped pecans. Sprinkle the mixture 
evenly over the top of the pie. Arrange the pecan 
halves on top, in a circle near the edge. 
6. Place the pie under the broiler just until the topping 
begins to bubble, being careful not to let the 
nuts burn. Transfer to a wire rack to cool slightly. 
Serve with whipped cream or ice cream, as desired. 
crisp coconut and chocolate pie 

MAKES ONE 8-INCH PIE 

4 tablespoons unsalted butter, softened 

11 ounces sweetened shredded coconut 
(about 6 cups) 


8 ounces semisweet or bittersweet 
chocolate, finely chopped 


11/4 cups heavy cream 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Place the butter and 
one-third of the coconut in the bowl of a food 
processor fitted with the metal blade. Process until 
the mixture forms a ball, 1 to 2 minutes. Transfer 
to a medium bowl. Sprinkle the remaining coconut 
over the mixture, and combine with your fingers. 
2. Place an 8-inch tart pan with a removable bottom 
on a baking sheet. Press the coconut mixture 
into the bottom and up the sides of the pan to form 
a crust, leaving the top edge loose and fluffy. Place 
a ring of aluminum foil over the edges to prevent 
burning. Bake until the center begins to brown, 10 
to 15 minutes; remove the foil, and cook until the 
edges are browned, 4 to 6 minutes. Transfer to a 
wire rack to cool completely. 
3. Place the chocolate in a medium heatproof bowl. 
Bring the cream just to a boil in a small saucepan, 
and pour over the chocolate. Let sit 10 minutes, and 
stir until the chocolate is melted and combined. Let 
cool, and pour into the coconut crust. Cover with 
plastic wrap, and transfer to the refrigerator until 
the filling is set, at least 1 hour. Cut into wedges, 
and serve. 
472 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


plum galette 

MAKES ONE 16 x 18-INCH GALETTE 

1 tablespoon all-purpose flour, plus more 
for the work surface 


Galette Pate Brisee (recipe follows) 
1/2 cup finely ground toasted hazelnuts 


2 tablespoons light-brown sugar 
1 tablespoon cornstarch 


1/4 teaspoon salt 

11/2 pounds (about 5) plums, sliced into 
 -thick wedges 

3 tablespoons granulated sugar 
1 large egg, lightly beaten 


1/2 cup plum or red currant jam 

1. Preheat the oven to 425 degrees F, with a rack in the lower 
third. On a lightly floured work surface, roll out 
the pate brisee to 1/8 inch thick. Trim the edges to 
form a 16 x 18-inch rectangle, and transfer to a 
parchment-lined baking sheet. In a small bowl, combine 
the flour, hazelnuts, brown sugar, cornstarch, 
and salt; spread to cover the middle of the dough, 
leaving a   border all around. 
2. Arrange the plums in rows on top, slightly overlapping 
the slices and alternating the direction of 
each row. Sprinkle the plums with granulated sugar. 
Fold the dough to enclose the edges; brush the dough 
with egg wash. Chill 30 minutes in refrigerator. 

3. Bake 10 minutes. Reduce the oven heat to 400 degrees F; 
bake until the pastry is golden brown and the plums 
are softened, about 30 minutes. Transfer to a wire 
rack; let cool to room temperature. Heat the jam in 
a small saucepan over low heat, stirring until 
melted. Let cool a few minutes; brush evenly over 
the plum slices. Serve. 
galette pate brisee 

MAKES ENOUGH FOR 1 GALETTE 

21/2 cups all-purpose flour 

1 teaspoon salt 

8 ounces (2 sticks) chilled unsalted butter 

1/2 cup ice water 

In the bowl of a food processor fitted with the metal 
blade, pulse the flour and salt. Add the butter; pulse 
until the mixture resembles coarse meal, about 15 
seconds. With the machine running, add the water 
in a slow, steady stream; process until the dough 
just holds together. Turn out onto a piece of plastic 
wrap, and flatten into a disk; wrap well. Chill at 
least 1 hour in the refrigerator. 

 

PIES AND TARTS 473 


raspberry tart 

SERVES 6 TO 8 

The tart shell can be made a day in advance; 
avoid filling it until 1 to 2 hours before you are 
ready to serve it in order to keep the shell as crisp 
and flaky as possible. 

All-purpose flour, for the work surface 

1 pound Puff Pastry dough (page 653), 
or best-quality frozen puff pastry (such 
as Dufour), thawed 


1 large egg, lightly beaten 
11/3 cups Pastry Cream (page 655) 

1/2 cup heavy cream 
2 6-ounce containers fresh raspberries, 
rinsed and dried 
1/4 cup confectioners' sugar 


1. Lightly flour a clean work surface. Using a rolling 
pin, gently roll out the dough into a rectangle at 
least 9 x 18 inches and 1/8 inch thick, being careful 
not to press too hard around the edges. Using a pastry 
wheel or sharp paring knife, trim the edges, and 
cut out 4   strips, 2 from one of the short ends 
and 1 from each of the long sides. Set aside. The resulting 
rectangle should be about 6 x 15 inches. 
Transfer to a baking sheet. 
2. Dock, or pierce, the dough all over with a fork. 
Using a pastry brush, moisten the dough with the 
beaten egg, being careful not to let any drip over 
the cut edges. 
3. Lay the reserved   strips on top of the edges 
of the large rectangle, positioning them to line up 
exactly with the outside edge; this will be the raised 
border that will encase the filling. Trim the strips 
to fit, overlapping them at the corners; brush egg 
wash underneath each of the 4 overlapping corners 
to seal them together. Brush the tops of the strips 
with egg wash, being careful not to let any drip 
down the sides. Cover with plastic wrap, and place 
in the refrigerator to chill 1 hour. 
4. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Transfer the tart shell 
to the oven, and bake until well browned and puffed 
all over, about 15 minutes. Remove from the oven; 
using a balled-up clean kitchen towel, press down 
on the center, leaving the borders puffy. Return to 
the oven; bake 5 minutes. Transfer to a wire rack 
to cool. Press down again, if needed. 

5. When the tart shell is completely cooled, place 
the pastry cream in a medium bowl. In a separate 
mixing bowl, whip the heavy cream until soft peaks 
form; fold into the pastry cream. Using a small offset 
spatula, spread the cream mixture over the bottom 
of the tart shell. Arrange the raspberries neatly 
in rows on top of the cream mixture to cover the 
bottom of the tart. Dust with confectioners' sugar; 
cut into strips, and serve. 
chocolate caramel tart 

MAKES ONE 9-INCH TART 

Chocolate Pate Sucree (page 651) 

1 cup chopped pecans 
1 cup sugar 


1/4 teaspoon salt 
1/4 cup water 


11/2 cups heavy cream 
2 tablespoons unsalted butter, 
room temperature 
1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 

6 ounces bittersweet chocolate, 
finely chopped 


Cocoa, for dusting (optional) 

Caramel-Dipped Pecans (optional; 
recipe follows) 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Roll the chocolate pate 
sucree 1/8 inch thick, and fit into a 9-inch fluted tart 
pan with a removable bottom. Dock the bottom of 
the tart with a fork. Refrigerate 30 minutes. 
2. Place the chopped pecans on a baking sheet, and 
toast until slightly darkened and fragrant, about 10 
minutes; set aside. 
3. Line the tart shell with parchment paper, pressing 
into the edges, and cover with dried beans or 
pie weights. Place on a baking sheet; bake for 20 
minutes. Remove the paper and beans, and continue 
baking until the crust is golden, about 10 minutes. 
Transfer to a wire rack to cool completely. 
474 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


4. Make the caramel by placing the sugar, salt, and 
water in a small saucepan. Bring the mixture to a 
boil over medium-high heat. Wash down the sides 
of the pan with a pastry brush dipped in water to 
prevent crystals from forming. Cook, gently swirling 
the pan (do not stir), until the caramel is a rich 
amber color. Remove from heat, and add 1/2 cup 
cream and the butter and vanilla; stir until smooth. 
5. Pour the mixture into the chocolate tart shell. 
Sprinkle the toasted pecans over the caramel; refrigerate 
while melting the chocolate. 
6. Place the chocolate in a medium heatproof bowl. 
Bring the remaining cup cream to a boil in a small 
saucepan; pour over the chocolate. Let sit for 5 minutes; 
stir until completely smooth. Pour over the 
caramel and nuts; return the tart to the refrigerator 
to chill for at least 1 hour. 
7. When ready to serve, if desired, dust the top of 
the tart with cocoa powder and garnish with 
caramel-dipped pecans. 
caramel-dipped pecans 

MAKES 24 

To produce interesting curves in the caramel 
drops, stand the skewers upright in flower foam 
or a heavy container while setting. If the caramel 
hardens before all the pecans have been dipped, 
rewarm it over low heat. A foolproof way to clean 
caramel from the pan is to bring it to a boil with a 
bit of added water. 

24 pecan halves 
3 cups sugar 


3/4 cup water 
1 teaspoon cream of tartar 
1. Gently insert an 8-inch wooden skewer into each 
pecan. Set aside. 
2. Prepare an ice-water bath, and set aside. Combine 
the sugar, water, and cream of tartar in a 
medium saucepan, and bring to a boil over 
medium-high heat. Wash down the sides of the pan 
with a pastry brush dipped in water to prevent sugar 
crystals from forming. Cook, without stirring, until 
the mixture begins to brown. Gently swirl the pan 
to color evenly. Remove from heat when the caramel 
is a rich amber color, and place the pan in the ice 
bath for 5 seconds to stop the cooking. 

3. Allow the caramel to sit until slightly thickened, 
about 15 minutes. (To test: Dip a wooden spoon into 
the caramel, and lift it several inches over the pan; 
if a drip slowly forms and then hardens, the caramel 
is ready.) When the caramel is ready, dip the pecans, 
lifting up and swirling slightly to fully coat. Hold 
the skewer over the pan to allow the drip to 
lengthen and slightly harden, about 1 minute. If necessary, 
use a pair of scissors to cut the drip from the 
caramel remaining in the pan. 
4. Place the skewers on an inverted baking sheet 
lined with waxed paper, and allow the caramel to 
completely harden, about 5 minutes. If desired, 
stand the skewers upright in flower foam or a heavy 
container until ready to serve. Gently remove the 
skewers before serving. 
chocolate cream pie 

MAKES ONE 8-INCH PIE 

For the smoothest, glossiest peaks, be careful not 
to overbeat the egg whites. 

1 12-ounce box chocolate wafers 

7 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted 

1/2 cup milk 

1 teaspoon unflavored gelatin 

1 cup heavy cream 

3/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons sugar 
8 ounces milk chocolate, finely chopped 
1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 
4 large egg whites 
1. Place the chocolate wafers in the bowl of a food 
processor, and pulse until finely ground. Transfer 
to a mixing bowl. Add the melted butter, and stir 
until well combined. Press into an 8-inch spring-
form pan, evenly coating the bottom and lower half 
of the sides. Cover the pan with plastic wrap, and 
place in the refrigerator to chill for 30 minutes. 
PIES AND TARTS 475 


2. Pour the milk in a small bowl. Sprinkle the gelatin 
over the milk, and let soften for 5 minutes. Place 
the cream and 2 tablespoons sugar in a small 
saucepan, and bring to a boil, stirring to dissolve 
the sugar. Add the gelatin mixture, and stir to combine. 
Remove from heat. Add the chocolate and 
vanilla; cover, and let stand for 3 minutes. Stir until 
thoroughly combined. 
3. Pass the mixture through a fine sieve into the prepared 
cookie crust; leave behind any undissolved 
chocolate to prevent the filling from becoming 
grainy. Return the filled crust to the refrigerator for 
6 hours or overnight. 
4. Place the egg whites and remaining 3/4 cup sugar 
in the heatproof bowl of an electric mixer, and place 
over a pan of barely simmering water. Stir constantly 
until the egg whites are warm to the touch 
and the sugar is completely dissolved, about 3 minutes. 
Attach the bowl to the mixer, and use the 
whisk attachment to beat the egg whites on 
medium speed until soft peaks form, about 3 minutes. 
Raise the speed to high, and beat until stiff 
and glossy but not dry, about 11/2 minutes. 
5. Remove the pie from the refrigerator. Using a rubber 
spatula, drop the meringue on top, lifting the 
spatula to create tall peaks. Use a small kitchen 
blowtorch to brown the tops of the meringue peaks, 
or place under a broiler, watching carefully, as they 
will brown very quickly. 
6. Chill the pie in the refrigerator, and serve cold. 
The pie will keep in the refrigerator up to 2 days. 
limeade pie 

MAKES ONE 131/2 x 4  TART 

12 ounces cream cheese, room temperature 

1 cup granulated sugar 

2 tablespoons finely grated lime zest 
(about 4 limes) 


1/3 cup fresh lime juice 
1/2 cup confectioners' sugar 


1 lime, washed and thinly sliced 
Graham-Nut Crust (recipe follows) 


1. Combine the cream cheese and granulated sugar 
in a food processor; process until the mixture is 
smooth. Add the lime zest and juice; pulse several 
times to combine. Transfer the filling to the prepared 
crust; cover with plastic wrap, and refrigerate 
until it is set, at least 1 hour. 
2. Preheat the oven to 250 degrees F. Line a baking sheet 
with parchment paper. Sprinkle the confectioners' 
sugar on a small plate. Dredge each lime slice in 
the sugar, turning to coat both sides. Transfer the 
slices to the prepared baking sheet. Bake until the 
slices are just stiff but not brown, about 40 minutes. 
Transfer to a wire rack to cool. 
3. To serve, arrange the lime slices around the tart, 
or make a slit halfway through each slice, and tuck 
into slices of pie. 
graham-nut crust 

MAKES ONE 131/2 x 4  CRUST 

1/4 cup pecans 

10 graham crackers (5 ounces) 

3 tablespoons sugar 

1/4 teaspoon salt 

4 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Place the pecans in a 
single layer on a rimmed baking sheet, and toast 
until they are fragrant, about 8 minutes. Remove 
from the oven; let cool. 
2. Place the graham crackers in a food processor; 
pulse until fine crumbs form. Add the sugar, salt, 
and pecans; pulse to combine. Add the butter; pulse 
until fine crumbs form. 
3. Transfer to a 131/2 x 4  tart pan with a removable 
bottom, and pat evenly into the bottom 
and up the sides. Place the pan on a baking sheet; 
bake until the crust is golden and fragrant, 8 to 10 
minutes. Transfer to a wire rack to cool. The crust 
may be made up to 1 day ahead and stored, covered 
with plastic wrap, at room temperature. 
476 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


strawberry chiffon pie 

MAKES TWO 8-INCH PIES 

If you are using pasteurized egg whites, you do 
not need to heat them before beating with the 
sugar and cream of tartar or coarse salt. 

1 quart strawberries, hulled, plus 1 pint, 
for garnish 


1 cup plus 2 tablespoons sugar 

11/2 1/4-ounce envelopes unflavored gelatin 
(11/2 tablespoons) 

2 large egg whites 

Pinch of cream of tartar 
2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 


1/2 cup creme fraiche 
Almond Shortbread Crust (recipe follows) 


1. Combine 1 quart strawberries and 1/2 cup sugar 
in the bowl of a food processor fitted with the metal 
blade; process until smooth, about 3 minutes; you 
should have 3 cups puree. Transfer half to a large 
heatproof mixing bowl; sprinkle the gelatin over 
the top; let soften, about 5 minutes. 
2. In a heatproof bowl of an electric mixer, combine 
the egg whites with the cream of tartar and 1/2 cup 
sugar. Place the bowl over a saucepan of simmering 
water, and whisk until the mixture is hot to the 
touch and the sugar is dissolved, about 2 minutes. 
Attach the bowl to the mixer fitted with the whisk 
attachment; beat on medium-high speed until soft 
peaks form, about 2 minutes. 
3. Place the gelatin mixture over the pan of simmering 
water, stirring occasionally, until the gelatin 
dissolves, about 5 minutes; remove from heat. 
Gradually whisk in the remaining puree; whisk in 
the lemon juice. 
4. In a small bowl, whisk the creme fraiche until soft 
peaks form; whisk into the puree mixture. Whisk in 
one-third of the egg whites to lighten; fold in the 
remaining whites just until they are combined (do 
not overmix). Divide among the crusts; refrigerate, 
covered with plastic, until the mixture is set, at least 
4 hours or overnight. 
5. Thinly slice the remaining pint strawberries. 
Place in a small bowl, and sprinkle with the remaining 
2 tablespoons sugar. Let stand at room 
temperature until the juices are running, at least 30 
minutes and up to 2 hours. Serve the pie, cut into 
wedges and garnished with sliced strawberries. 
almond shortbread crust 

MAKES TWO 8-INCH CRUSTS 

40 shortbread cookies (about 18 ounces) 
11/4 cups blanched whole almonds, toasted 

5 tablespoons sugar 
1/2 teaspoon salt 
1/2 cup (1 stick) unsalted butter, melted 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Place the cookies in 
the bowl of a food processor fitted with the metal 
blade, and process until fine crumbs form. Add 
about 3/4 cup almonds with the sugar and salt; 
process until fine crumbs form. Add the butter, and 
process until the mixture comes together. 
2. Coarsely chop the remaining almonds, and stir 
into the crust mixture. Press into the bottom and 
sides of 2 8-inch pie plates to form a crust, and bake 
until they are just turning golden, about 10 minutes. 
Transfer to a wire rack to cool completely. 
PIES AND TARTS 477 


blackberry tartlets 

MAKES EIGHT 3  TARTLETS 

If you have enough tartlet pans, use a second one 
over each to line the dough during baking to 
keep the crust from shrinking down the sides. 
You can also line the tartlet shells with parchment 
paper and dried beans; the shells will take a 
few minutes longer to bake. 

Martha's Perfect Pate Brisee (page 647) 

All-purpose flour, for the work surface 

2 half-pint containers blackberries 

(21/2 cups) 

4 tablespoons sugar 

1 teaspoon lemon zest 

1 cup heavy cream 

8 fresh pansies for garnish (optional) 

1. Roll the dough 1/8 inch thick on a lightly floured 
surface; fit into 8 fluted tartlet pans (31/2 inches in 
diameter, 11/2 inches deep). Chill at least 30 minutes, 
or overnight. 
2. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Line the tart shells 
with a second pan or parchment paper and dry 
beans. Place in the oven; bake until golden brown, 
20 to 25 minutes. Remove the top pans or parchment 
lining; return to the oven if the bottoms of the 
shells are not fully browned. Set on a cooling rack 
until fully cool. 
3. Fill a bowl with ice and water; set aside. Place the 
berries, 2 tablespoons sugar, and the lemon zest in 
a medium saucepan over medium heat. Cook until 
the berries let off juices, the sugar dissolves, and 
the mixture begins to bubble, about 5 minutes. Remove 
from heat, and set the pan in the ice-water 
bath to cool. 
4. Chill a bowl and large whisk. Place the cream and 
remaining 2 tablespoons sugar in the bowl; whip 
until soft peaks form. Fold 1/2 cup berry mixture into 
the whipped cream. Fill the tartlet shells with the mixture; 
top with the remaining berries and garnish 
with fresh pansies. 
marsala cheese tart 
with oranges 

MAKES ONE 8-INCH TART 

5 ounces gingersnaps, broken into pieces 

4 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted 
8 ounces cream cheese, room temperature 


1/2 cup sugar 
2 tablespoons Marsala 


1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 
1/2 cup heavy cream 


3 navel oranges 

1. Place the gingersnaps in the bowl of a food 
processor, and process until finely ground. Transfer 
to a bowl, add the melted butter, and stir until 
well combined. Transfer to an 8-inch fluted tart pan 
with a removable bottom, and press into the bottom 
and up the sides to form an even crust. Place 
in the freezer. 
2. Place the cream cheese and sugar in the bowl of 
an electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment; 
beat until fluffy. Add the Marsala and vanilla extract, 
and beat until combined. Whip the heavy 
cream to stiff peaks, and fold into the cream cheese 
mixture. Spoon the mixture into the prepared crust; 
return to the freezer at least 1 hour 15 minutes, or 
until firm. 
3. Cut the ends off the oranges, and remove the peel, 
pith, and outer membranes, following the curve of 
the fruit with a paring knife. Lift the sections away 
from the inner membranes; reserve the sections. 
Serve the cheese tart, garnished with orange sections. 
478 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


individual rhubarb 
and raspberry tartlets 

MAKES EIGHT 4-INCH TARTLETS 

The extra tablespoon of flour, sprinkled into the 
center of each pastry circle, helps thicken the 
rhubarb juices as the tartlets cook. 

11/2 pounds trimmed rhubarb, cut into 
  pieces (about 51/2 cups) 

1/2 pound (about 1 pint) raspberries 

1 cup all-purpose flour, plus more for 
the work surface 


2 cups sugar, plus more for sprinkling 

Martha's Perfect Pate Brisee (page 647) 

1. Combine the rhubarb, berries, 1/2 cup flour, and 
sugar in a medium bowl; set aside. 
2. Divide the dough evenly into 8 pieces. On a 
lightly floured surface, roll out each piece of dough 
into a rough circle about 7 inches in diameter and 
1/8 inch thick. Chill the dough until just cold and 
easy to work with, about 30 minutes. 
3. Spoon 1 tablespoon flour in the center of each 
unbaked shell. Cover with about 1/2 cup rhubarb 
mixture, spreading the mixture to about 1 inch from 
the edge of the shell. Fold the edges of the shells 
over the rhubarb filling, leaving the tarts open in 
the center; gently brush between the folds with 
water, and press gently on the folds so the dough 
adheres together. Transfer the tarts to 2 parchment-
lined baking sheets, arranging them so they are several 
inches apart. Return to the refrigerator to chill 
at least 30 minutes. 
4. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Remove the tarts from 
the refrigerator, brush them with water, and sprinkle 
with sugar. Place in the oven to bake until the 
crust is golden brown, about 30 minutes, rotating 
the pans halfway through. Reduce heat to 350 degrees F, 
and continue to bake until the juices are bubbly and 
just starting to run out from center of each tartlet, 
10 to 12 minutes more, rotating the pans as needed. 
Transfer immediately to a wire rack, and let cool 
before serving. 
peanut butter tart 

MAKES ONE 133/4 x 4  TART 

10 43/4 x 2  graham crackers, 
broken into pieces 


6 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted 

3 ounces best-quality milk chocolate, 
plus more for curls 


13/4 cups heavy cream 

3/4 cup creamy peanut butter 
1/2 cup cream cheese (4 ounces) 
1/3 cup sweetened condensed milk 


1. Place the graham crackers in the bowl of a food 
processor, and pulse until fine crumbs are formed. 
Transfer to a medium bowl, and add the butter. Stir 
with a fork until thoroughly combined. Place the 
crumbs in a 133/4 x 4  rectangular tart pan with 
a removable bottom. Press the crumbs up the sides 
of the pan to form the edge of the tart and then 
evenly over the bottom of the pan. Place in the refrigerator 
while making the filling. 
2. Fill a large bowl with ice and water. Finely chop 
the chocolate, and place in a medium bowl. Place 
1/2 cup cream in a small saucepan over medium heat, 
and bring to a boil. Pour over the chopped chocolate, 
and set aside for 5 minutes to yield chocolate 
ganache. Whisk to combine. Set in the ice bath until 
the ganache is cool, whisking constantly. Once cool, 
remove from the ice bath, and whisk until the 
ganache is just thick enough to hold its shape; do 
not overbeat. Spread in the bottom of the prepared 
crust, and return to the refrigerator until set. 
3. Combine the peanut butter, cream cheese, and 
sweetened condensed milk in a food processor; 
process until smooth. Transfer to a mixing bowl. 
4. In another bowl, whip 3/4 cup heavy cream to soft 
peaks. Add the whipped cream to the peanut butter 
mixture; whisk to combine. 
5. Spoon the mixture into the prepared crust; return 
to the refrigerator for 2 hours or overnight. Remove 
the tart from refrigerator, and transfer to a serving 
platter 10 minutes before serving. Whip the remaining 
1/2 cup cream. Top the tart with dollops of 
whipped cream. Use a vegetable peeler to make 
chocolate curls for garnish. 
PIES AND TARTS 479 


apple praline tart 

MAKES ONE 8-INCH TART 

This tart may also be made in an 8-inch spring-
form pan. Fit the dough into the pan, and press 
it up the sides. Trim so it is 13/4 inches high. 

1 disk Martha's Perfect Pate Brisee 
(page 647) 


1/2 cup all-purpose flour, plus more for 
the work surface 


1/2 cup dried apricots, cut into quarters 
1/2 cup dried figs, preferably Calimyrna, 
cut into   pieces 
2 tablespoons cognac 


1/4 cup water 

3 Granny Smith apples, peeled and 
cored (about 11/4 pounds) 


Juice of 1 lemon 

1/2 cup roughly chopped Almond Praline 
(recipe follows), plus more for garnish 


3 large eggs 

3/4 cup sugar 
12 tablespoons unsalted butter 
1 vanilla bean, split lengthwise and scraped 


Vanilla ice cream, for serving 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Place an 8 x 1  
cake ring on a parchment-lined baking sheet. Roll 
the pate brisee on a lightly floured surface to .inch 
thickness. Fit gently into the ring, easing the 
dough into the corners and removing excess dough 
so the tart shell is flush with the top of the cake ring. 
Use a fork to pierce the bottom of the tart shell, and 
place in the freezer for 30 minutes. 
2. Place the apricots, figs, cognac, and water in a 
medium saucepan, and bring to a simmer over 
medium heat. Cook, stirring occasionally, until all 
the liquid has been absorbed and the fruit is softened, 
about 4 minutes. Set aside to cool. 
3. Cut the apples into   cubes. Place them in 
a bowl, and combine with the lemon juice, tossing 
to coat. Add the dried fruit mixture and chopped 
praline, and stir to combine. 
4. Combine the eggs, sugar, and flour in a medium 
bowl, and whisk until smooth. Place the butter and 
the vanilla bean pod and seeds in a saute pan, and 
cook over medium-high heat until the butter begins 
to brown. Add to the egg mixture, and whisk until 
fully incorporated. Remove the pod, and discard. 

5. Remove the tart shell from the freezer, and fill 
with the apple mixture, making sure the dried fruits 
are evenly distributed. Slowly pour the egg mixture 
over the fruit, letting it seep into all the gaps, until 
it is 1/8 inch from the top of the tart shell. 
6. Place the tart in the oven, and bake until a tester 
inserted into the center comes out clean and the 
top is nicely browned, about 1 hour 30 minutes. 
Transfer to a wire rack to cool for 30 minutes before 
removing the ring. 
7. Serve warm or at room temperature, topped with 
vanilla ice cream and garnished with almond praline. 
almond praline 

MAKES ONE 10 x 1  SHEET 

11/2 cups sliced almonds 

1 tablespoon unsalted butter, 
room temperature 


2 cups sugar 

1/2 cup water 
Juice of 1/2 lemon (1 tablespoon) 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Place the almonds on 
a baking sheet, and toast until golden brown and 
fragrant, about 10 minutes. Set aside to cool. 
2. Butter a 10 x 1  rimmed baking sheet. Spread 
the toasted almonds in an even layer on the pan. 
Place the sugar and water in a medium saucepan; 
stir to combine. Place over medium-high heat; bring 
to a boil, brushing down the sides of the pan with a 
pastry brush dipped in water to prevent crystals from 
forming. Once the sugar is dissolved, cook without 
stirring until the sugar is a deep amber color. 
3. Add the lemon juice; immediately pour mixture 
over almonds, coating with a thin layer. If the 
caramel doesn't cover all the nuts, tilt the pan 
slightly to distribute, or stir in the nuts with a 
wooden spoon, being careful not to touch the 
caramel or the hot pan. Cool completely. 
4. Gently twist the pan to release the praline. Break 
into pieces. Store in an airtight container for up to 
1 week. 
480 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


cakes 



basic chocolate cake 

MAKES ONE 8-INCH LAYER CAKE 

The cake layers can be wrapped well in plastic 
and refrigerated for up to 2 days; trim tops just 
before assembling. 

Unsalted butter, for pans 

11/4 cups unsweetened cocoa powder, 
plus more for dusting 

21/2 cups all-purpose flour 
21/2 cups sugar 

21/2 teaspoons baking soda 

11/4 teaspoons baking powder 

11/4 teaspoons salt 

2 large eggs plus 1 large yolk 
11/4 cups warm water 

11/4 cups buttermilk 

1/2 cup plus 2 tablespoons vegetable oil 
11/4 teaspoons pure vanilla extract 

Vanilla or Chocolate Buttercream 

Frosting (recipes follow) 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F, with racks in the upper 
and lower thirds. Cut 2 8-inch rounds of parchment 
paper to line the bottoms of 2 8-inch (2 inches deep) 
round cake pans. Butter and line the pans. Butter 
the linings. Dust the pans with cocoa, tapping out 
excess. Set aside. 
2. Sift together the cocoa, flour, sugar, baking soda, 
baking powder, and salt into the bowl of an electric 
mixer. Return the bowl to the mixer. Fit the mixer 
with the paddle attachment. Add the eggs, yolk, 
warm water, buttermilk, oil, and vanilla. Mix on low 
speed until smooth, about 3 minutes. 
3. Divide the batter evenly between the prepared 
pans. Bake, switching the positions of the pans and 
rotating them halfway through, until a cake tester 
inserted into the centers comes out clean, about 40 
minutes. Let cool in the pans on wire racks 30 minutes. 
Run a thin knife around the edges of the cakes 
to loosen. Unmold; peel off the parchment. Let cool 
completely, top sides up, on the racks. 
4. Trim the tops of the cake layers with a long serrated 
knife to make them level. Using a small offset 
spatula, cover the top of one cake layer evenly 
with 11/2 cups frosting; spread the frosting so it extends 
just beyond the edges of the cake. 

5. Place the second layer, cut side down, on top; 
press gently to level. Frost the top and sides of the 
assembled cake with the remaining frosting. 
vanilla buttercream frosting 

MAKES ABOUT 6 CUPS 

The frosting can be refrigerated in an airtight 
container for up to 3 days. Before using, bring to 
room temperature; beat with the paddle attachment 
on medium-low speed until smooth. 

11/3 cups sugar 

1 vanilla bean, halved lengthwise 

7 large egg whites 

Pinch of salt 

11/4 pounds (5 sticks) unsalted butter, cut 

into tablespoon-size pieces, softened 

2 teaspoons pure vanilla extract 

1. Put the sugar in the bowl of a food processor, and 
scrape in the vanilla seeds. Process until combined. 
Sift into a bowl, and discard any large pieces of 
vanilla. 
2. Put the egg whites, vanilla-sugar mixture, and 
salt in the heatproof bowl of an electric mixer. Set 
over a pan of simmering water. Whisk constantly 
until the sugar has dissolved and the mixture registers 
160 degrees F on an instant-read thermometer. 
3. Return the bowl to the mixer; fit the mixer with 
the whisk attachment. Beat on medium-high speed 
until stiff, glossy peaks form and the mixture is cool, 
about 10 minutes. 
4. Switch to the paddle attachment. With the mixer 
on medium speed, add the butter, 1 or 2 tablespoons 
at a time, mixing well after each addition. Mix, 
scraping down the sides of the bowl as needed, until 
the mixture is smooth. Mix in the vanilla extract. 
Use immediately, or cover and refrigerate. 
482 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


chocolate buttercream frosting 

MAKES ABOUT 6 CUPS 

The frosting can be refrigerated in an airtight 
container for up to 3 days. Before using, bring to 
room temperature; beat with the paddle attachment 
on medium-low speed until smooth. 

11/2 cups sugar 

6 large egg whites 
Pinch of salt 


1 pound 6 ounces (51/2 sticks) unsalted 
butter, cut into tablespoon-size pieces, 
softened 


6 ounces semisweet chocolate, melted 
and cooled 


1. Put the sugar, egg whites, and salt in the heatproof 
bowl of an electric mixer. Set over a pan of 
simmering water. Whisk constantly until the sugar 
has dissolved and the mixture registers 160 degrees F on 
an instant-read thermometer. 
2. Return the bowl to mixer; fit the mixer with the 
whisk attachment. Beat on medium-high speed 
until stiff, glossy peaks form, and the mixture is 
cool, about 10 minutes. 
3. Switch to the paddle attachment. With the mixer 
on medium speed, add the butter, 1 or 2 tablespoons 
at a time, mixing well after each addition. Mix, 
scraping down the sides of the bowl as needed, until 
the mixture is smooth. Mix in the chocolate. Use 
immediately, or cover and refrigerate. 
basic yellow cake 

MAKES ONE 9-INCH LAYER CAKE 

The cake layers can be wrapped well in plastic 
and refrigerated for up to 2 days; trim the tops 
just before assembling. 

Unsalted butter, for the pans 

41/4 cups all-purpose flour, plus more 
for dusting 

31/3 cups sugar 
31/2 teaspoons baking soda 

13/4 teaspoons baking powder 

13/4 teaspoons salt 

3 large eggs plus 1 large yolk 
13/4 cups warm water 

2 cups buttermilk 

3/4 cup vegetable oil 
2 teaspoons pure vanilla extract 

Vanilla or Chocolate Buttercream 
Frosting (recipes opposite and at left) 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F, with racks in the upper 
and lower thirds. Cut 2 9-inch rounds of parchment 
paper to line the bottoms of 2 9-inch (2 inches deep) 
round cake pans. Butter and line the pans. Butter 
the linings. Dust the pans with flour, tapping out 
excess. Set aside. 
2. Sift together the flour, sugar, baking soda, baking 
powder, and salt into the bowl of an electric 
mixer. Return the bowl to the mixer; fit the mixer 
with the paddle attachment. Add the eggs, yolk, 
warm water, buttermilk, oil, and vanilla. Mix on low 
speed until the mixture is smooth, about 3 minutes. 
3. Divide the batter evenly between the prepared 
pans. Bake, switching the positions of the pans and 
rotating them halfway through, until a cake tester 
inserted into the centers comes out clean, about 42 
minutes. Let cool in the pans on wire racks 30 minutes. 
Run a thin knife around the edges of the cakes 
to loosen. Unmold; peel off the parchment. Let cool 
completely, top sides up, on the racks. 
4. Trim the tops of the cake layers with a long serrated 
knife to make them level. Using a small offset 
spatula, evenly cover the top of one cake layer 
with 11/2 cups frosting; spread the frosting so it extends 
just beyond the edges of the cake. 
5. Place the second cake layer, cut side down, on 
top; press gently to make it level. Frost the top and 
sides of assembled cake with the remaining frosting. 
CAKES 483 


apple-ginger stack cake 

MAKES ONE 9-INCH LAYER CAKE 

5 cups dried apples (about 3/4 pound) 

5 cups apple cider 
12/3 cups granulated sugar 

1 cup (2 sticks) unsalted butter, softened, 
plus more for the pans 


3 cups sifted all-purpose flour, plus 
more for the pans 


1 large egg 
1 cup unsulfured molasses 


1 cup buttermilk 
1 teaspoon baking soda 


1 teaspoon ground ginger 
1/8 teaspoon ground cloves 


1/2 teaspoon salt 
Confectioners' sugar, for dusting 


1. Bring the apples and cider to a boil in a large pot. 
Reduce to a simmer; cook, stirring occasionally, 
until the apples begin to soften and the liquid has 
reduced, 40 to 50 minutes. Add 1 cup water; cook, 
mashing the apples slightly, until the liquid has 
reduced, about 10 minutes. Add 2/3 cup granulated 
sugar and 1/2 cup water; simmer until the apples are 
very soft and coated in syrup, about 15 minutes. Let 
cool completely. 
2. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Butter 2 9-inch round 
cake pans. Line the bottoms with parchment paper, 
and butter the parchment. Dust with flour; tap out 
excess. Set aside. 
3. Put the butter and the remaining cup sugar in 
the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle 
attachment. Mix on medium-high speed until 
creamy, about 3 minutes. Reduce speed to low; mix 
in the egg, molasses, buttermilk, baking soda, flour, 
spices, and salt. 
4. Divide the batter evenly between the prepared 
pans. Bake until a cake tester inserted into the centers 
comes out clean and the tops spring back when 
lightly touched, about 35 minutes. Let cool on a wire 
rack 10 minutes. Run a knife around the edges of 
the pans to loosen; invert to unmold. Remove the 
parchment; reinvert onto the racks. Let cool. 
5. Using a long serrated knife, cut each cake in half 
horizontally. Place 1 bottom layer on a serving platter. 
Top with one-third of the apple mixture, spreading 
to the edges. Stack 1 top layer on the apples, and 
top with another one-third of the apple mixture. Repeat 
with the remaining cake bottom and apples, 
and top with the remaining cake top. Let stand at 
room temperature at least 1 hour before serving. Sift 
confectioners' sugar over the top of the cake. 
chocolate-ginger cake 
with bourbon sauce 

MAKES ONE 9-INCH BUNDT CAKE 

1/2 cup (1 stick) unsalted butter, softened, 
plus more for the pan 


1/2 cup unsweetened Dutch-process 
cocoa powder, plus more for dusting 


1/2 cup unsulfured molasses 

3/4 cup packed light-brown sugar 
2 large eggs 
1/4 cup whole milk 


2 teaspoons finely grated peeled 
fresh ginger 


1 cup all-purpose flour 

3/4 teaspoon baking soda 
1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 
1 teaspoon ground ginger 


1 teaspoon ground cinnamon 
Bourbon Sauce (recipe follows) 


1. Preheat the oven to 325 degrees F. Butter a 9-inch Bundt 
pan. Dust with cocoa powder, and tap out excess; 
set aside. Put the butter, molasses, brown sugar, and 
1/4 cup water in a medium saucepan over medium-
low heat. Cook, stirring constantly, until the butter 
has melted. Transfer the mixture to a large bowl. 
Let cool 5 minutes. 
484 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


2. Add the eggs, milk, and grated ginger to the molasses 
mixture; whisk to combine. Sift together the 
flour, cocoa powder, baking soda, salt, ground ginger, 
and cinnamon into a medium bowl. 
3. Gently fold the flour mixture into the molasses 
mixture until just combined. (There should be 
lumps remaining.) Pour the batter into the prepared 
pan. Bake the cake until a cake tester inserted into 
the center comes out clean, about 30 minutes. Let 
the cake cool completely in the pan on a wire rack. 
4. Invert the cake, and unmold onto a cake stand or 
a large serving platter. Using a spoon, drizzle the 
warm bourbon sauce over the cake in a back-andforth 
motion. Serve immediately. 
bourbon sauce 

MAKES 11/4 CUPS 

1/2 cup (1 stick) unsalted butter 

2 large egg yolks 

1 cup packed dark-brown sugar 

1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 

1/4 cup good-quality bourbon 

Put the butter, egg yolks, brown sugar, vanilla, and 
bourbon in a heatproof bowl set over a pan of simmering 
water. Cook, whisking constantly, until the 
mixture registers 160 degrees F on a candy thermometer, 
about 7 minutes. 

cream cheese-poppy seed cakes 

MAKES 12 SMALL CAKES 

1 cup (2 sticks) unsalted butter, 
softened, plus more for the molds 


11/2 cups cake flour (not self-rising), 
plus more for the molds 

1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 

11/3 cups granulated sugar 
3 large eggs, plus 3 large egg yolks 

11/2 teaspoons pure vanilla extract 

3/4 cup whipped cream cheese, room 
temperature 
3 tablespoons confectioners' sugar, 
plus more for dusting 


1 teaspoon poppy seeds 

1. Preheat the oven to 325 degrees F. Butter 12 3  
brioche molds or a standard 12-cup muffin tin. Dust 
with flour; tap out excess. Whisk the flour and salt 
in a medium bowl; set aside. 
2. Put the butter and granulated sugar into the bowl 
of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment; 
cream on medium speed until light and fluffy. 
Mix in the eggs and yolks, one at a time. Add the 
vanilla and 11/2 teaspoons water; mix until combined. 
Reduce speed to low. Add the flour mixture; 
mix until just combined, scraping down the sides 
as needed. Spoon 1 cup batter into each mold. 
3. Beat the cream cheese and confectioners' sugar 
in the clean bowl of the electric mixer on low speed 
until creamy and combined. Spoon 1 tablespoon of 
the mixture onto the batter in each mold; sprinkle 
with poppy seeds. Bake until a cake tester comes 
out clean, about 25 minutes. Let cool 5 minutes; 
transfer the cakes to a wire rack to cool completely. 
Serve dusted with confectioners' sugar. 
CAKES 485 


genoise torte with chocolate 
and praline caramel mousses 

SERVES 10 

11/2 teaspoons unflavored gelatin 

11/4 cups sugar 

21/4 cups heavy cream 
1/4 cup (1/2 stick) unsalted butter, 
cut into 4 pieces 

2 ounces unsweetened chocolate, 
finely chopped 


Almond Praline (recipe follows) 
3 tablespoons cognac or brandy 


1/2 cup Simple Syrup (page 660) 

Genoise (12 x 16-inch cake; recipe 
follows), cut crosswise into 4 rectangles 

3/4 pound bittersweet chocolate, scraped 
with a large knife (about 1 cup) 
1. Sprinkle 1 teaspoon gelatin over 2 tablespoons 
water in a heatproof bowl. Sprinkle the remaining 
1/2 teaspoon gelatin over 1 tablespoon water in another 
heatproof bowl. Let soften about 3 minutes. 
2. Bring the sugar and 1/2 cup water to a boil in a 
medium saucepan over high heat; swirl the pan to 
dissolve the sugar. Wash down the sides of the pan 
with a wet pastry brush to prevent crystals from 
forming. Boil until the sugar turns dark amber, 
about 10 minutes. Remove from heat. Slowly add 1 
cup cream and the butter, stirring until the butter 
has melted. Put 2/3 cup caramel into a medium bowl; 
set aside. Stir together the remaining caramel and 
the unsweetened chocolate in another medium 
bowl; set aside. 
3. Set 1 bowl of softened gelatin over a pan of simmering 
water, and stir until the gelatin has melted. 
Repeat with the remaining bowl of gelatin. Pour the 
larger batch of gelatin into the plain caramel. Pour 
the smaller batch of gelatin into the chocolate 
caramel. Let both caramels cool completely, stirring 
occasionally, 10 to 12 minutes. 
4. Whisk the remaining 11/4 cups cream in a medium 
bowl until stiff peaks form. Fold one-third of the 
whipped cream into the plain caramel mixture; fold 
the remaining whipped cream into the chocolate-
caramel mixture. Refrigerate the mousses until 
slightly firm, about 10 minutes. Stir the almond praline 
into the plain caramel mousse. 

5. Stir the cognac and simple syrup in a small bowl. 
Assemble the torte: Place 1 cake rectangle on a platter; 
brush with one-quarter of the cognac syrup. 
Spread with half the chocolate-caramel mousse. Top 
with another cake rectangle; brush with one-quarter 
of the syrup. Spread with praline-caramel mousse. 
Refrigerate 10 minutes to set. Top with another cake 
rectangle; brush with one-quarter of the syrup. 
Spread with the remaining chocolate-caramel 
mousse. Top with the remaining cake rectangle; 
brush with the remaining syrup. Clean the edges 
with an offset spatula. Refrigerate until firm, about 
30 minutes. Before serving, sprinkle with bittersweet 
chocolate shavings. 
almond praline 

MAKES ABOUT 2/3 CUP 

Vegetable oil cooking spray 
1/2 cup sugar 
1/3 cup sliced blanched almonds 
1/4 teaspoon salt 


1. Spray a rimmed baking sheet with cooking spray; 
set aside. Bring the sugar and 1/4 cup water to a boil 
in a small saucepan over medium-high heat. Swirl 
the pan to dissolve the sugar. Wash down the sides 
of the pan with a wet pastry brush to prevent crystals 
from forming. Boil until the sugar turns light 
amber, about 7 minutes. 
2. Add the almonds and salt; cook, stirring constantly, 
until the almonds are toasted and the 
caramel turns dark amber. Pour onto the prepared 
sheet. Let cool completely. 
3. Break into shards. Pulse until finely ground, with 
a few larger pieces remaining, in a food processor. 
486 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


  

CAKES 487 


genoise 

MAKES ONE 12 x 16-INCH SHEET CAKE OR 

ONE 9-INCH ROUND CAKE 

See the how-to on page 487. 

Vegetable oil cooking spray 

2/3 cup sifted cake flour, plus more for the pan 
Pinch of salt 


3 large eggs 
2 large egg yolks 


1/2 cup granulated sugar 

1/4 cup (1/2 stick) unsalted butter, 
melted and cooled 


Confectioners' sugar, for dusting 
(if rolling the cake) 


1. Coat a 12 x 16-inch rimmed baking sheet or a 
9-inch round cake pan with cooking spray. Line with 
parchment; coat with cooking spray. Dust with flour, 
tapping out excess. Stir together the flour and salt 
into a medium bowl; set aside. Preheat the oven to 
450 degrees F for a sheet cake or 400 degrees F for a round cake, 
with a rack in the lower third. 
2. Put the eggs, egg yolks, and granulated sugar 
in the heatproof bowl of an electric mixer. Set over 
a pan of simmering water; whisk until the sugar has 
dissolved and the mixture is warm to the touch. Return 
the bowl to the mixer, fitted with the whisk attachment. 
Beat on medium-high speed for 2 
minutes. Raise speed to high. Beat until the mixture 
is pale and thick, about 4 minutes more. 
3. Remove the bowl from the mixer. Sift the flour 
mixture over the top; using a large rubber spatula, 
carefully fold it into the egg mixture, cutting 
through the middle and lifting gently over the sides. 
When almost incorporated, pour the melted butter 
down the side of the bowl; gently fold to incorporate 
completely. 
4. Spread the batter evenly in the sheet or pan with 
a large offset spatula. Bake until golden brown and 
springy to the touch, about 6 minutes for a 12 x 16inch 
cake and 15 minutes for a 9-inch round cake. 
5. For the 12 x 16-inch cake: Run a small knife 
around the sides of the baking sheet; invert cake 
onto a wire rack. Remove the parchment. Reinvert 
the cake onto the rack. Let cool completely. 

6. For the 9-inch round cake: Let cool in the pan 
on a wire rack for 15 minutes; run a small knife 
around the sides of the pan. Invert onto a rack; remove 
the parchment, and reinvert onto the rack. Let 
cool completely. 
strawberry cake 

MAKES ONE 10-INCH CAKE 

6 tablespoons unsalted butter, 
softened, plus more for the pie plate 


11/2 cups all-purpose flour 

11/2 teaspoons baking powder 
1/2 teaspoon salt 

1 cup plus 2 tablespoons sugar 
1 large egg 


1/2 cup milk 
1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 


1 pound strawberries, hulled and halved 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Butter a 10-inch pie 
plate. Sift the flour, baking powder, and salt together 
into a medium bowl. 
2. Put the butter and 1 cup sugar in the bowl of an 
electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment. 
Mix on medium-high speed until pale and fluffy, 
about 3 minutes. Reduce speed to medium-low; mix 
in the egg, milk, and vanilla. 
3. Reduce speed to low; gradually mix in the flour 
mixture. Transfer the batter to the buttered pie 
plate. Arrange the strawberries on top of the batter, 
cut sides down and as close together as possible. 
Sprinkle the remaining 2 tablespoons sugar over 
the strawberries. 
4. Bake the cake 10 minutes. Reduce the oven temperature 
to 325 degrees  F. Bake until the cake is golden 
brown and firm to the touch, about 1 hour. Let cool 
in the pie plate on a wire rack. Cut into wedges. The 
cake can be stored at room temperature, loosely 
covered, for up to 2 days. 
488 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


pecan torte 

MAKES ONE 10-INCH TORTE 

9 large eggs, separated 

11/2 cups granulated sugar 

1 tablespoon freshly grated lemon zest, 
plus more for garnish 


1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 
1 teaspoon salt 


12 ounces pecans, toasted and finely 
ground (3 cups) 


Confectioners' sugar, for dusting 

Passover Lemon Curd (recipe follows) 
Mixed berries, for serving 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees  F. Put the egg yolks, 
granulated sugar, zest, vanilla, and salt in the bowl 
of an electric mixer fitted with the whisk attachment. 
Beat on medium-high speed until pale and 
thickened, about 4 minutes. Fold in pecans. 
2. Beat the whites in a clean mixing bowl until stiff 
peaks form; fold into the yolk mixture. Pour into a 
10-inch springform pan. 
3. Bake until golden brown, about 1 hour (if the top 
browns too quickly, tent with foil). Let cool on a wire 
rack 30 minutes. Remove the sides of the pan. Let 
cool completely. Dust with confectioners' sugar. 
Serve with curd and berries; garnish with zest. 
passover lemon curd 

MAKES 13/4 CUPS 

2 large eggs plus 6 large egg yolks 

1 cup sugar 
Pinch of salt 


Freshly grated zest of 2 lemons plus 2/3 
cup fresh lemon juice (3 lemons) 

11/2 sticks (12 tablespoons) margarine, 
cut into 6 pieces 

Beat the eggs, yolks, sugar, and salt with an electric 
mixer until pale and thickened. Beat in the lemon 
juice; add the margarine. Bring to a simmer in a 
medium saucepan over medium heat, whisking. 
Cook until thickened, 3 to 4 minutes. Pour through 
a fine sieve into a bowl; stir in zest. Refrigerate until 
cold, about 1 hour. 

glazed lemon pound cake 

MAKES ONE 5 X 9-INCH LOAF 

This cake doesn't rise very much, so don't be surprised 
if it is shorter than you expect. 

5 tablespoons unsalted butter, 
softened, plus more for the pan 


3/4 cup plus 3 tablespoons sugar, plus 
more for dusting 
1 cup all-purpose flour 
1/4 teaspoon salt 


1/4 teaspoon baking soda 

3 tablespoons fresh lemon juice plus 
finely grated zest of 2 lemons, plus more 
zest for garnish (optional) 


1/4 cup milk 

2 large eggs 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Butter a 5 x 9-inch loaf 
pan. Dust with sugar, and tap out excess; set aside. 
Whisk together the flour, salt, and baking soda. Stir 
together 1 tablespoon lemon juice and the milk. 
2. Put the butter and 3/4 cup sugar in the bowl of an 
electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment. 
Mix until pale and fluffy, about 2 minutes. Mix in 
the eggs and zest. Working in 2 batches, alternate 
mixing in the flour mixture and the milk mixture. 
Pour the batter into the prepared pan. Bake until a 
cake tester comes out clean, about 35 minutes. 
3. Meanwhile, stir together the remaining 3 tablespoons 
sugar and 2 tablespoons lemon juice. Upon 
removing the cake from the oven, immediately 
brush with the lemon glaze. Let the cake cool in the 
pan 10 minutes. Unmold the cake. Brush the remaining 
glaze on top. Garnish with zest. 
CAKES 489 


six-layer chocolate cake 

MAKES ONE 9-INCH LAYER CAKE 

Vegetable oil cooking spray 

31/2 cups all-purpose flour, plus more 
for dusting 

1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon 
baking powder 


2 teaspoons salt 
4 sticks (1 pound) unsalted butter, softened 


23/4 cups sugar 
1 cup creme fraiche (8 ounces) 

1 tablespoon pure vanilla extract 
9 large eggs 


11/4 pounds bittersweet chocolate (preferably 
70 percent cacao), melted and cooled 

Tangy Chocolate Frosting (recipe follows) 

1. Preheat the oven to 325 degrees F. Cut 3 9-inch rounds 
of parchment paper to line the bottoms of 3 9 x 2inch 
round cake pans. Coat the pans with cooking 
spray. Line with parchment rounds; coat the parchment 
with cooking spray. Flour the pans, tapping 
out excess; set aside. 
2. Sift the flour, baking powder, and salt together 
into a bowl; set aside. 
3. Put the butter and sugar in the bowl of an electric 
mixer fitted with the paddle attachment. Mix 
on medium-high speed until pale and fluffy, about 
3 minutes. Reduce speed to medium-low; mix in the 
creme fraiche and vanilla. Add the flour mixture 
and eggs in alternating additions; mix well, scraping 
down the sides of the bowl as necessary, until 
the batter is smooth. 
4. Reduce speed to low. Pour in the melted chocolate 
in a slow, steady stream; mix until combined. 
Remove the bowl from the mixer; scrape down the 
sides (batter will be thick). Stir until combined. 
5. Divide the batter among the pans, smoothing the 
tops with an offset spatula. Bake until a cake tester 
inserted into the centers comes out with moist 
crumbs, 35 to 40 minutes. 
6. Let the cakes cool in the pans on wire racks 30 
minutes. Unmold the cakes; peel off the parchment. 
Let the cakes cool completely. 
7. Trim the tops of the cakes with a long serrated 
knife to make the surfaces level. Using a ruler to 
measure halfway up the sides of 1 cake, insert toothpicks 
around the cake's middle at   intervals 
to mark 2 equal layers. Rest the serrated knife on 
the toothpicks; halve the cake horizontally using a 
sawing motion. Carefully slide the top cake half 
onto a cardboard cake round or a plate. Repeat with 
the remaining 2 cakes. 
8. Put 1 bottom cake half on a cake plate. Using a 
small offset spatula, spread 3/4 cup frosting on top. 
Carefully set the top cake half back in place. Spread 
3/4 cup frosting on top. Repeat, stacking the remaining 
4 cake halves on top and spreading 3/4 cup 
frosting between each. (Do not frost the top of the 
last layer.) 
9. Spread the top and sides of the cake with 2 cups 
frosting in a thin smooth layer. Refrigerate 30 minutes. 
Spread the remaining frosting over the top 
and sides; apply with the offset spatula using an S 
motion to create a textured appearance. The cake 
can be refrigerated, under a cake dome, up to 3 days; 
bring to room temperature before serving. 
tangy chocolate frosting 

MAKES 10 CUPS 

41/2 cups confectioners' sugar 

1/2 cup good-quality unsweetened 
cocoa powder 


1/4 teaspoon salt 

12 ounces cream cheese (11/2 packages), 
room temperature 


11/2 sticks (12 tablespoons) unsalted 
butter, softened 

18 ounces bittersweet chocolate (preferably 
70 percent cacao), melted and cooled 


11/2 cups creme fraiche (12 ounces) 

1. Sift the sugar, cocoa, and salt together into a bowl; 
set aside. Put the cream cheese and butter in the 
bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment. 
Mix on medium speed until smooth. 
2. Reduce speed to low; gradually mix in the sugar 
mixture. Pour in the melted chocolate in a slow, 
490 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


steady stream. Gradually mix in the creme fraiche. 
The frosting can be refrigerated, in an airtight container, 
up to 3 days. Just before using, bring to room 
temperature; beat until smooth. 

brandied cherry cassata 

SERVES 9 

3 cups fresh ricotta cheese 

2 cups granulated sugar 
1 tablespoon freshly grated orange zest 


1 vanilla bean, halved lengthwise 

11/2 cups drained brandied cherries, plus 
1/4 cup liquid from jar 

Vegetable oil cooking spray 
1 cup all-purpose flour, plus more for 
dusting 
1/2 cup milk 


4 tablespoons unsalted butter 
2 large eggs, room temperature 


1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 
1 teaspoon baking powder 


1/4 teaspoon salt 
Confectioners' sugar, for dusting 


1. Put the ricotta, 1/2 cup granulated sugar, and zest 
in a food processor; scrape in the vanilla seeds. 
Process until smooth. Transfer the mixture to a bowl, 
and then stir in the drained cherries. Refrigerate. 
2. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Bring 1/2 cup water and 
1/2 cup granulated sugar to a boil in a small 
saucepan, stirring until the sugar is dissolved. Let 
cool completely. Stir in the cherry liquid. Refrigerate. 
Coat an 8-inch-square baking pan with cooking 
spray. Line with parchment; coat the lining with 
spray. Dust with flour; tap out excess. 
3. Bring the milk and butter to a boil in a small 
saucepan. Remove from heat. Put the eggs in the 
bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the whisk attachment; 
beat on medium-high speed until pale 
and fluffy, about 6 minutes. Beat in the remaining 
cup granulated sugar and the vanilla. On low speed, 
gradually add the flour. Drizzle in the hot milk mixture. 
Beat in the baking powder and salt. 
4. Pour into the prepared pan. Bake until a cake 
tester inserted into the center comes out clean, 
about 20 minutes. Cool on a wire rack 30 minutes. 
Unmold; remove the parchment. Cool completely. 
5. Split the cake horizontally into thirds. Brush a 
cut side of each layer with syrup. Spread half of the 
filling on the bottom layer. Top with middle layer, 
and spread with the remaining filling. Top with the 
third layer. Refrigerate until firm, 2 hours. Dust with 
confectioners' sugar. Cut into 9 squares. 
chocolate truffle cakes 

MAKES 6 INDIVIDUAL CAKES 

For extra-fudgy results, make these cakes 1 day 
ahead; wrap them well in plastic wrap, and refrigerate. 
Serve them chilled or at room temperature. 

5 tablespoons unsalted butter, plus more 
for the muffin tin 


1 tablespoon all-purpose flour, plus 
more for dusting 


14 ounces semisweet chocolate, chopped 

2 tablespoons sugar 
2 large eggs 


1/4 teaspoon salt 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Generously butter a 
standard 6-cup muffin tin. Dust with flour, tapping 
out excess; set aside. 
2. Put the chocolate, butter, and 1 tablespoon sugar 
in a medium heatproof bowl set over a pan of simmering 
water; whisk occasionally until smooth. Remove 
from heat, and let stand until cool and 
thickened, 3 to 5 minutes. Process the eggs and remaining 
tablespoon sugar in a food processor until 
pale and doubled in volume, about 2 minutes. Sift 
the flour and salt into the egg mixture; pulse to combine. 
Add the chocolate mixture 1/4 cup at a time; 
pulse each addition until combined, about 10 times. 
(Batter will be thick.) 
3. Spoon the mixture into the prepared muffin tin, 
filling the cups three-quarters full; swirl the tops 
with the back of a spoon. Bake until the tops are 
springy to the touch, 18 to 20 minutes. Immediately 
turn out onto wire racks; reinvert, and let cool. 
CAKES 491 


coconut rum-raisin bundt cake 
with rum-caramel glaze 

MAKES ONE 12-CUP BUNDT CAKE 

10 ounces (21/2 sticks) unsalted butter, 
softened, plus more for the pan 


3 cups all-purpose flour, plus more 
for dusting 


1 cup raisins 

3/4 cup dark rum 
1 teaspoon salt 
1/2 teaspoon baking powder 
23/4 cups plus 2 tablespoons packed 
light-brown sugar 
6 large eggs 

2 teaspoons pure vanilla extract 

3/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons heavy cream 
1 cup sweetened flaked coconut 
1 cup granulated sugar 


1. Preheat the oven to 325 degrees F. Butter a 12-cup Bundt 
pan; dust with flour, tapping out excess. Soak the 
raisins in 1/2 cup rum. 
2. Whisk together the flour, salt, and baking powder; 
set aside. Put the butter and brown sugar in the 
bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment; 
cream on medium speed until smooth. 
Mix in the eggs, 1 at a time. Add the vanilla. On low 
speed, mix in the flour mixture in 3 additions, alternating 
with 2 additions of 6 tablespoons cream 
each (12 total). Mix in the raisin mixture and the coconut. 
Transfer the batter to the prepared pan; 
smooth the top. 
3. Bake, rotating about halfway through, until a cake 
tester comes out clean, about 1 hour 55 minutes. Let 
cool in the pan on a wire rack 20 minutes. Run a thin 
knife around the sides of the cake; unmold. Let cool. 
4. Heat the granulated sugar and 1/4 cup water in a 
small saucepan over medium heat, gently stirring 
occasionally, until the sugar is dissolved and the 
syrup is clear. Cook, without stirring, until the syrup 
comes to a boil, washing down the sides of the pan 
with a wet pastry brush to prevent crystals from 
forming. Let boil, gently swirling, until medium 
amber. Remove from heat. Carefully pour in the remaining 
1/4 cup rum and 2 tablespoons cream. Let 
cool, stirring, until thickened. Drizzle over cake. 
almond custard cake 

MAKES ONE 9-INCH CAKE 

Almond flour is simply ground blanched 
almonds-it doesn't contain any wheat flour. You 
can make your own by finely grinding 1/2 cup 
whole blanched almonds in a food processor. The 
dough can be refrigerated for up to 2 days or 
frozen for up to 1 month (thaw before using). The 
custard filling can be made up to 1 day ahead; 
press plastic wrap directly onto its surface (to 
prevent a skin from forming), and refrigerate in 
an airtight container. 

12 tablespoons (11/2 sticks) unsalted butter, 
softened, plus more for the pan 


21/2 cups plus 1 tablespoon all-purpose 
flour, plus more for dusting 

1/2 cup almond flour 

11/2 teaspoons baking powder 
1/4 teaspoon salt 

13/4 cups plus 2 tablespoons granulated sugar 
7 large egg yolks 

3 tablespoons sweet dessert wine, such 
as Sauternes or Beaumes-de-Venise 


1 teaspoon pure almond extract 

1 vanilla bean, halved lengthwise, and 
seeds scraped to loosen 


13/4 cups whole milk 

Freshly grated zest of 1 orange 
1 tablespoon heavy cream 


2 tablespoons sliced blanched almonds 
Confectioners' sugar, for dusting 


Strawberry-Rhubarb Sauce, for serving 
(recipe follows) 

492 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


1. Cut a 9-inch round of parchment paper to line 
the bottom of a 9 x   round cake pan. Butter 
and line the pan. Butter the lining, then flour the 
pan, tapping out excess; set aside. 
2. Make the dough: Whisk together 21/4 cups flour 
and the almond flour, baking powder, and salt in a 
medium bowl; set aside. 
3. Put the butter and 11/2 cups granulated sugar in 
the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle 
attachment. Mix on medium speed until pale and 
fluffy, about 2 minutes. Add 3 egg yolks, 1 at a time, 
mixing well after each addition and scraping down 
the sides of the bowl. Add the wine, almond extract, 
and half the vanilla seeds; mix until combined, 
about 15 seconds. Add the flour mixture in 2 additions, 
mixing until just combined (do not overmix). 
4. Divide the dough in half, and flatten each piece 
into a disk. Wrap the disks in plastic wrap. Refrigerate 
1 hour. 
5. Make the custard filling: Prepare an ice-water 
bath; set aside. Fit an electric mixer with the whisk 
attachment. Put 3 egg yolks and the remaining 6 
tablespoons sugar in a clean mixing bowl; beat on 
medium speed until pale yellow and thickened. Add 
the remaining 5 tablespoons flour; beat on low 
speed until combined. 
6. Bring the milk, remaining vanilla seeds, and zest 
to a boil in a medium saucepan over medium heat. 
Pour 1/2 cup hot milk mixture into the egg mixture, 
and beat on medium-low speed until combined. Stir 
the mixture into the remaining milk in the saucepan. 
Bring to a simmer over medium heat, stirring to 
reach the bottom and sides of the pan. Cook until 
thickened, 1 to 2 minutes. Set the pan in the ice-water 
bath; stir occasionally until cool, about 20 minutes. 
7. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Press 1 piece of dough 
onto the bottom of the prepared pan and 11/2 inches 
up the sides. Spoon the custard on top, and spread 
into an even layer. 
8. On a lightly floured surface, roll the remaining 
dough into an 1  circle. Drape over the pan; 
trim the edges flush with the pan. Gently press the 
edges of the top crust to meet the bottom crust; 
crimp the top edges with a fork to seal. Refrigerate 
the cake 30 minutes. 
9. Beat the remaining egg yolk and the cream in a 
small bowl. Brush the top of the cake with egg wash; 
sprinkle with almonds. Bake until golden brown, 
about 35 minutes. Let cool completely in the pan 
on a wire rack. Invert the cake to unmold; peel off 
the parchment, and reinvert. Just before serving, 
dust the cake with confectioners' sugar. Serve with 
the strawberry-rhubarb sauce. 
strawberry-rhubarb sauce 

MAKES 21/2 CUPS 

This sauce can be made 2 days ahead and refrigerated 
in an airtight container. Reheat over 
medium-low heat, or bring to room temperature 
before serving. 

12 ounces rhubarb (6 to 8 stalks), 
trimmed and cut into   pieces 


6 tablespoons sugar 
11/2 cups strawberries (8 ounces), 
hulled and halved 
1/2 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 

Bring the rhubarb, sugar, and 1/4 cup water to a simmer 
in a medium saucepan over medium-high heat, 
stirring occasionally. Cook until the liquid is reduced 
by half, about 8 minutes. Stir in the strawberries 
and vanilla; cook until the berries are 
softened, about 3 minutes more. Serve the sauce 
warm or at room temperature. 

CAKES 493 


raspberry-swirl cheesecake 

MAKES ONE 9-INCH CAKE 

1 cup finely ground graham crackers 
(5 ounces; about 8 sheets) 


2 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted 
13/4 cups sugar 

6 ounces raspberries (about 11/2 cups) 

4 packages (8 ounces each) cream cheese, 
room temperature 


Pinch of salt 
1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 


4 large eggs, room temperature 
Boiling water, for roasting pan 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Wrap the exterior of 
a 9-inch springform pan (including base) in a double 
layer of foil; set aside. 
2. Stir together the cracker crumbs, melted butter, 
and 2 tablespoons sugar in a medium bowl. Press 
the crumb mixture firmly onto the bottom of the 
pan. Bake until set, about 10 minutes. Let cool in 
the pan on a wire rack. Reduce oven heat to 325 degrees F. 
3. Process the raspberries in a food processor until 
smooth, about 30 seconds. Pass the puree through 
a fine sieve into a small bowl; discard the solids. 
Whisk in 2 tablespoons sugar, and set aside. 
4. Put the cream cheese in the bowl of an electric 
mixer fitted with the paddle attachment; mix on 
medium speed until fluffy, about 3 minutes. With 
the mixer on low speed, add the remaining 11/2 cups 
sugar in a slow, steady stream. Add the salt and 
vanilla; mix until well combined. Add the eggs, one 
at a time, mixing each until just combined (do not 
overmix). Pour the cream cheese filling over crust. 
5. Drop the raspberry sauce by the teaspoon on top. 
With a wooden skewer or toothpick, swirl the sauce 
into the filling. 
6. Set the cake pan inside a large, shallow roasting 
pan. Transfer to the oven. Carefully ladle boiling 
water into the roasting pan to reach halfway up the 
sides of the cake pan. Bake until the cake is set but 
still slightly wobbly in center, 60 to 65 minutes. 

7. Transfer the cake pan to a rack; let cool completely. 
Refrigerate, uncovered, 6 hours or overnight. 
Before unmolding, run a knife around the edge of 
the cake. 
lemon-blackberry 
pudding cakes 

MAKES 6 INDIVIDUAL CAKES 

1 pint blackberries 

1/2 cup plus 1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice 
(about 3 lemons) 


1 cup plus 3 tablespoons sugar 

3 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted, plus 
more for the ramekins 


3 large eggs, separated 
6 tablespoons cake flour (not self-rising), 
sifted 
1 cup milk 


1/4 teaspoon salt 

4 ounces creme fraiche (about 1/2 cup) 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Process 21/2 ounces 
blackberries (12 to 15 berries), 1 tablespoon lemon 
juice, and 3 tablespoons sugar in a food processor 
or blender until smooth. Pass the mixture through 
a fine sieve into a small bowl; discard the solids. Set 
the sauce aside. 
2. Butter the inner top inch of 6 6-ounce ramekins; 
set aside. Whisk together the egg yolks and 3/4 cup 
sugar in a medium bowl. Whisk in the flour and 
milk in two batches each, beginning with the flour. 
Whisk in the remaining 1/2 cup lemon juice, the salt, 
and the melted butter, and set aside. 
3. Put the egg whites in the bowl of an electric mixer 
fitted with the whisk attachment; beat on medium-
high speed until very frothy, about 11/2 minutes. 
With the mixer running, add the remaining 1/4 cup 
sugar in a slow, steady stream; beat until the whites 
hold stiff (but not dry) peaks, about 2 minutes. 
Whisk half the whites into the reserved lemon mixture 
until combined; gently fold in the remaining 
whites with a rubber spatula. 
494 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


4. Place the ramekins in a high-sided roasting pan 
or baking dish, and divide the batter among the 
ramekins, filling each almost to the top. Spoon a 
few drops of berry sauce onto the cakes, and use a 
toothpick or skewer to swirl the sauce into the batter. 
Transfer to the oven; pour boiling water into the 
pan, a bit more than halfway up the sides of the 
ramekins. 
5. Bake until the cakes are set and the tops are just 
starting to turn golden brown, 35 to 40 minutes. 
With tongs, transfer the ramekins from the pan to 
a wire rack, and let cool 15 minutes. 
6. Meanwhile, beat the creme fraiche in a clean mixing 
bowl to soft peaks. Serve the cakes warm with 
creme fraiche and the remaining berries. 
honey cake with 
caramelized pears 

MAKES ONE 10-INCH CAKE 

To make a dairy-free version of this recipe, substitute 
margarine for the butter and soy milk for the 
regular milk. The cake can be made (without the 
pears) 1 day ahead, and stored in plastic wrap at 
room temperature. 

Unsalted butter, softened, for pan 

13/4 cups all-purpose flour, plus more 
for dusting 

3/4 teaspoon baking powder 
1/2 teaspoon baking soda 
1 teaspoon coarse salt 


1/2 teaspoon ground cinnamon 
2 large eggs 


1/2 cup granulated sugar 
1/4 cup packed light-brown sugar 


1/2 cup plus 2 tablespoons best-quality honey 
1/2 cup milk 


1/2 cup vegetable oil 
1/2 teaspoon freshly grated lemon zest 


Caramelized Pears (recipe follows) 

Freshly whipped cream or nondairy 
whipped topping, for serving (optional) 

1. Preheat the oven to 325 degrees F. Butter a 10-inch spring-
form pan. Dust with flour; tap out excess. Whisk together 
the flour, baking powder and soda, salt, and 
cinnamon in a bowl; set aside. Mix the eggs and 
sugars on high speed in the bowl of an electric 
mixer fitted with the paddle attachment until pale 
and thick, about 3 minutes. 
2. Whisk together the honey, milk, oil, and zest. 
With the mixer on low, add the honey mixture to 
the egg mixture; mix until combined, about 1 
minute. Add half the flour mixture; mix until 
smooth. Mix in the remaining flour mixture. Pour 
the batter into the pan. 
3. Bake until dark golden brown and a cake tester 
inserted in the center comes out clean, about 50 
minutes. Let cool in the pan on a wire rack 15 minutes. 
Run a thin knife around the edge of the cake; 
carefully remove the sides of the pan. Transfer the 
cake to a platter. Top with pears. Serve with 
whipped cream or topping, if desired. 
caramelized pears 

MAKES ABOUT 2 CUPS 

1 tablespoon unsalted butter 

1/4 cup sugar 
13/4 pounds red Anjou pears, cut into  thick 
wedges (or  -thick wedges, if 
pears are firm) 

1/4 cup best-quality honey 

Heat the butter in a large skillet over medium heat. 
Add the sugar; cook, stirring, until almost dissolved, 
1 to 2 minutes. Add the pears; cook, stirring occasionally, 
until soft and just golden, 12 to 20 minutes. 
Pour in the honey; cook, stirring, until the pears are 
coated and very soft, 3 to 5 minutes. 

CAKES 495 


lemon-poppy seed lady cake 

MAKES ONE 8-INCH 4-LAYER CAKE 

1 cup (2 sticks) unsalted butter, room 
temperature, plus more for the pan 


3 cups sifted cake flour (not self-rising), 
plus more for the pan 


11/2 tablespoons baking powder 

1/4 teaspoon salt 
13/4 cups sugar 

11/4 teaspoons pure vanilla extract 
2 tablespoons poppy seeds, plus 
more for garnish 
1 tablespoon finely grated lemon zest 

1 cup milk 
8 large egg whites, room temperature 


Pinch of cream of tartar 
1 cup chilled heavy cream 


11/2 cups Lemon Curd (page 656) 
Seven-Minute Frosting (page 658) 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees  F. Butter 2 8 x   
round cake pans, and line with parchment paper. 
Butter the parchment, and dust the bottoms and 
sides with flour, tapping out excess; set aside. 
2. Into a medium bowl, sift together the flour, baking 
powder, and salt twice; set aside. In a mixing 
bowl, using the paddle attachment, cream the butter 
on low speed until soft. Increase speed to 
medium; beat until pale and fluffy. 
3. Gradually add 11/2 cups sugar; beat until fluffy, 
about 3 minutes. Beat in the vanilla, poppy seeds, 
and lemon zest. With the mixer on low speed, add 
the flour mixture in 2 batches, alternating with the 
milk; beat until thoroughly combined after each addition. 
Scrape the sides of the bowl; beat 10 seconds 
more. Set aside. 
4. In another mixing bowl, whisk the egg whites 
and cream of tartar on low speed until foamy. Increase 
speed to medium-high; gradually add the remaining 
1/4 cup sugar until the peaks are just stiff. 
Gently fold in the whites; do not overmix. 
5. Divide the batter between the prepared pans; 
bake until golden and a cake tester inserted in the 
centers comes out clean, about 40 minutes. Transfer 
to a wire rack to cool completely. To remove the 
cakes, invert onto plates; peel off the parchment 
paper, and reinvert so the top side is up. 
6. Make the filling: In a small bowl, whip the heavy 
cream to soft peaks. Fold in the lemon curd; cover 
with plastic, and refrigerate until chilled and firm, 
at least 2 hours. 
7. Assemble the cake: Using a serrated knife, trim 
the tops of both cakes to make level, if desired. Slice 
each in half horizontally to make a total of 4 layers. 
Brush away crumbs from the tops of the layers. 
8. Place one of the bottom layers on a serving platter; 
spread with 1 cup lemon filling. Top with another 
cake layer; spread with 1 cup filling. Repeat 
with another cake layer and filling; top with the remaining 
cake layer. Cover the entire cake with plastic 
wrap, and carefully transfer to the refrigerator, 
steadying it with your hands to keep the layers from 
sliding. Chill until filling is firm, at least 2 hours. 
9. When ready to serve, frost the cake and garnish 
with poppy seeds. 
pastiera with strawberry sauce 

MAKES ONE 8-INCH CAKE 

1 quart whole milk 

3/4 cup arborio rice 
1 teaspoon ground cinnamon 
1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 
1 vanilla bean, split lengthwise 


11/4 cups granulated sugar 
Unsalted butter, for the pan 

All-purpose flour, for the pan 

3 pounds fresh ricotta cheese, drained 3 
hours or, preferably, overnight 


3 whole large eggs plus 3 large yolks, 
lightly beaten 


Confectioners' sugar, for dusting 

Strawberry Sauce (recipe follows) 

496 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


1. Bring the milk to a boil in a large saucepan over 
medium-high heat. Stir in the rice, cinnamon, salt, 
and vanilla bean. Reduce heat to medium-low; cook, 
stirring occasionally with a wooden spoon, until the 
rice is very tender and has absorbed all the liquid, 
about 30 minutes. 
2. Remove the pan from the heat. Stir in 3/4 cup granulated 
sugar. Cover; let cool, stirring occasionally. 
Discard the vanilla bean. 
3. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Butter and flour an 
8-inch springform pan. In a large bowl, combine the 
rice mixture, ricotta, whole eggs and egg yolks, and 
remaining 1/2 cup sugar. Pour into the prepared pan. 
Bake until golden on top and almost set in the center, 
65 to 70 minutes; cover with foil if starting to 
brown too much. Transfer the pan to a cooling rack. 
4. When the cake has completely cooled, run a knife 
around the edge to loosen. Gently remove the ring; 
transfer the cake to a serving platter. Sprinkle with 
confectioners' sugar, and serve with sauce. 
strawberry sauce 

MAKES 11/2 CUPS 

1 pint strawberries, hulled and halved 


2 tablespoons sugar 


2 teaspoons fresh lemon juice 


Combine all the ingredients in a medium nonreactive 
saucepan. Cook over medium-low heat, stirring 
occasionally, until the strawberries are soft, 5 
to 7 minutes. Serve warm or at room temperature. 

ABOUT PASTIERA 

Pastiera, a traditional Neopolitan Easter 
"pie," is actually a type of cheesecake. 
Though no two recipes are alike, all contain 
ricotta cheese and a sweetened grain 
(usually rice or wheat berries), symbolizing 
spring's fertility. 


cheesecake with 
poached apricot halves 

MAKES ONE 8-INCH SQUARE CAKE 

Unsalted butter, at room temperature, 
for the pan 

11/2 pounds cream cheese, at room 
temperature 

3/4 cup sugar 
1/2 cup sour cream, at room temperature 
1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 


3 large eggs 
1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice 


16 Poached Apricot Halves (page 443) 

1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees  F. Butter an 8-inchsquare 
baking pan. Line the bottom with parchment 
paper; set the pan aside. 
2. In the bowl of an electric mixer, beat the cream 
cheese until smooth. Mix in the sugar, sour cream, 
and vanilla. Add the eggs 1 at a time, beating until 
each is fully incorporated before adding the next. 
Beat in the lemon juice. 
3. Fill the prepared pan with the cream cheese mixture. 
Smooth the top with a spatula. Place the pan 
in a larger baking pan, and transfer to the oven. 
Pour enough hot water into the larger baking pan 
to come halfway up the sides of the smaller pan. 
Bake until the cake is just set in the center and 
lightly browned on top, about 35 minutes. 
4. Transfer the cheesecake from the water bath to 
a wire rack. While cake is slightly warm, after about 
30 minutes (it will be harder to unmold once cake 
has cooled longer), invert onto a platter. Refrigerate, 
covered, overnight. 
5. To serve, arrange poached apricot halves, cut side 
down, on top of the cheesecake, allowing the juice 
to pool on the surface and drizzle down the edges. 
CAKES 497 


hummingbird cake 

MAKES ONE 9-INCH LAYER CAKE 

Unsalted butter, room temperature 

3 cups all-purpose flour, plus more 
for the pans 


1 teaspoon baking soda 

1 teaspoon ground cinnamon 
1/2 teaspoon salt 


1 cup vegetable oil 
2 teaspoons pure vanilla extract 


2 cups sugar 
3 large eggs 


2 cups mashed ripe banana (about 3 large) 

1 can (8 ounces) crushed pineapple, 
drained 


1 cup chopped walnuts or pecans 
1 cup desiccated coconut (unsweetened) 


Cream Cheese Frosting (recipe follows) 

Dried Pineapple Flowers (recipe follows), 
optional 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F with a rack in the center. 
Butter two 9 x   round cake pans. Line the 
bottoms of the pans with parchment paper. Butter 
the paper, and dust the pans with flour, tapping out 
any excess. Set aside. 
2. In a medium bowl, sift together the flour, baking 
soda, cinnamon, and salt; set aside. 
3. In the bowl of an electric mixer, beat the oil, 
vanilla, and sugar until combined, about 2 minutes. 
Add the eggs 1 at a time, incorporating each before 
adding the next. Beat at medium speed until the 
mixture is pale yellow and fluffy, about 3 minutes. 
4. In a medium bowl, mix together the banana, 
pineapple, walnuts, and coconut. Add to the egg 
mixture; stir until well combined. Add the flour mixture; 
blend well. 
5. Divide the batter between the pans. Bake, rotating 
the pans halfway through, until golden brown 
and a cake tester inserted in the center comes out 
clean, 30 to 40 minutes. 
6. Transfer the pans to a greased wire rack. Let cool 
15 minutes. Run a knife around the edges to loosen. 
Invert onto the rack; reinvert, top side up. Cool completely. 
Assemble the cake, or wrap each layer well 
and freeze (thaw before using). 
7. With a serrated knife, trim and discard the 
rounded top off one layer. Place the layer on a serving 
platter. Using an offset spatula, spread the top 
of the layer with 1/4 inch frosting. Top with the 
untrimmed layer. Frost the sides and top of the cake 
with the remaining frosting. Decorate with pineapple 
flowers, if desired. Serve at room temperature. 
(The cake can be refrigerated up to 3 days.) 
 

498 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


cream cheese frosting 

MAKES 11/2 QUARTS 

(ENOUGH FOR ONE 9-INCH LAYER CAKE) 

1 pound (16 ounces) cream cheese, 
room temperature 


2 teaspoons pure vanilla extract 

1 cup (2 sticks) unsalted butter, cut 
into pieces, room temperature 


2 pounds confectioners' sugar, sifted 

1. In the bowl of an electric mixer, beat the cream 
cheese and vanilla until light and creamy, about 2 
minutes. With the mixer on medium speed, gradually 
add the butter, beating until incorporated. 
2. Reduce mixer speed to low. Gradually add the 
sugar, beating until incorporated. Use immediately, 
or cover and refrigerate up to 3 days. Bring to room 
temperature before using. 
dried pineapple flowers 

MAKES ABOUT 2 DOZEN 

2 large or 4 small pineapples 

1. Preheat the oven to 225 degrees F. Line 2 baking sheets 
with Silpats (French nonstick baking mats) or 
parchment paper. 
2. Peel the pineapples. Using a small melon baller, 
remove and discard the eyes. Slice the pineapple 
very thinly; place the slices on the baking sheets. 
Cook until the tops look dried, about 30 minutes. 
Flip the slices; cook until completely dried, 25 to 30 
minutes more. Cool on a wire rack. Refrigerate in 
an airtight container up to 3 days. 
mini pear and 
blueberry spice cakes 

MAKES 6 SMALL CAKES 

These individual upside-down cakes are baked- 
and can be transported-in a muffin tin. 

7 tablespoons unsalted butter, room 
temperature, plus more for the tin 


6 tablespoons light corn syrup 

12 teaspoons packed light-brown sugar 

3/4 cup fresh blueberries, picked over 
and rinsed 
1 ripe Bartlett pear, halved lengthwise, 
cored, and cut into thin wedges 


1 cup all-purpose flour 

3/4 teaspoon baking powder 
1/4 teaspoon baking soda 
1/8 teaspoon salt 
1/2 teaspoon ground cinnamon 


1/4 teaspoon ground nutmeg 
1/4 teaspoon ground allspice 


1/4 teaspoon ground ginger 
2/3 cup granulated sugar 


1 large whole egg plus 1 large egg yolk 

3/4 cup buttermilk 
1/2 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Generously butter the 
cups and top of a muffin tin with six 8-ounce cups. 
Place 1 teaspoon butter in each muffin cup. Top 
each with 1 tablespoon corn syrup; sprinkle with 2 
teaspoons light brown sugar. Arrange 7 or 8 blueberries 
in each cup. Cut the pear slices to fit the 
shape of muffin cups; place 4 or 5 pieces on top of 
the berries, spreading the slices to cover the berries. 
Arrange the remaining berries over the pears, and 
set the tin aside. 
2. Into a small bowl, sift the flour, baking powder, 
baking soda, salt, cinnamon, nutmeg, allspice, and 
ginger; set aside. In the bowl of an electric mixer 
fitted with the paddle attachment, beat the granulated 
sugar and remaining 5 tablespoons butter on 
medium speed until light and fluffy, 3 to 4 minutes. 
Add the egg and egg yolk; beat until smooth. 
3. With the mixer on low speed, add the flour mixture 
to the butter mixture in 2 batches, alternating 
with the buttermilk and beginning and ending with 
the flour. Stir in the vanilla. 
4. Pour 1/3 cup batter over the fruit in each muffin 
cup. Gently tap the bottom of the tin against the 
counter several times to evenly distribute the batter. 
5. Bake the cakes until golden around the edges 
and a cake tester inserted in the centers comes out 
clean, about 25 minutes. Remove from the oven; let 
cool in the tin. 
CAKES 499 


sticky buckwheat cake 

MAKES ONE 10-INCH CAKE 

The buckwheat flour adds a deep, assertive flavor 
to this dessert; the flour is also highly nutritious. 

for the topping 

1/2 cup raisins 

1/2 cup brandy 
1 tablespoon unsalted butter 


1/2 cup packed dark-brown sugar 
11/2 teaspoons ground cinnamon 

2/3 cup light corn syrup 
1/2 cup coarsely chopped pecans (13/4 ounces) 


1 apple


for the cake 

3/4 cup (11/2 sticks) unsalted butter, 
room temperature 
11/4 cups packed light-brown sugar 
3 large eggs 

13/4 cups all-purpose flour 
1 cup buckwheat flour 

11/2 teaspoons ground ginger 
1 tablespoon baking powder 

1/2 teaspoon salt 
1 cup milk 


1 tablespoon peeled and grated 
fresh ginger 


1. Make the topping: In a small bowl, combine the 
raisins and brandy; let stand until the raisins are 
plump, about 20 minutes. Drain the raisins; discard 
the liquid. 
2. In a 10-inch seasoned cast-iron skillet, melt the 
butter over medium heat. Sprinkle with the brown 
sugar and cinnamon, and remove from the heat. 
Drizzle with the corn syrup. Strew the pecans, apple, 
and raisins over the corn syrup; set aside. 
3. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Make the cake: In the 
bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment, 
cream the butter until smooth. Add the 
sugar; beat until light and fluffy. Add eggs one at 
a time, beating until combined after each addition. 
4. Into a large bowl, sift together the flours, ground 
ginger, baking powder, and salt. In another bowl, 
combine the milk and fresh ginger. Alternately add 
the flour and milk mixtures to the butter mixture, 
beating until just combined after each addition, beginning 
and ending with flour mixture. 
5. Pour the batter into the prepared skillet; smooth 
the top with an offset spatula. Bake until golden 
brown and a cake tester inserted in the center 
comes out clean, about 50 minutes. Transfer to a 
wire rack; let stand 5 minutes, then invert onto a 
serving platter. Serve warm or at room temperature. 
crepe gateau with strawberry 
preserves and creme fraiche 

SERVES 6 TO 8 (MAKES 15 CRePES) 

The crepe batter can be made through step 1 up 
to 1 day in advance and stored, covered, in the refrigerator. 
When assembling the gateau, do not 
spread the cream and jam to the edges on the 
bottom layers, because the weight of the top will 
push out the filling. The gateau should be assembled 
no more than 2 hours before serving. 

3/4 cup all-purpose flour 
4 tablespoons confectioners' sugar 
Pinch of salt 

2 large whole eggs, room temperature 

2 large egg yolks, room temperature 
11/4 cups milk, room temperature 

4 tablespoons unsalted butter 
11/2 cups creme fraiche 

1/2 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 

1 cup strawberry or other fruit preserves 

1. Into a medium bowl, sift together the flour, 1 tablespoon 
sugar, and the salt. Make a well in the center, 
and fill it with the eggs, egg yolks, and a few 
tablespoons milk; whisk until a thick, smooth paste 
forms. Add the remaining milk, and whisk until no 
lumps remain. 
500 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


2. Melt the butter in an 8-inch nonstick skillet with 
a 6-inch-diameter bottom; pour into the batter, leaving 
a coating of butter in the skillet. Let the batter 
rest at room temperature at least 1 hour. 
3. Over medium heat, warm the skillet thoroughly. 
Lift the skillet off the heat; stir the batter, and carefully 
ladle 3 tablespoons into the skillet. Immediately 
rotate the skillet so the batter is thinly spread 
evenly across the bottom to the edges. Return the 
skillet to the heat; cook the crepe until the edges 
are golden brown and lacy, about 1 minute. Carefully 
flip the crepe; cook the other side until golden 
brown, about 30 seconds. Slide the crepe out of the 
skillet onto a plate. Repeat with the remaining batter, 
stacking the cooked crepes on top of one another. 
Let the crepes cool completely. 
4. Place the creme fraiche in a medium bowl set in 
an ice-water bath. Add the vanilla and remaining 
3 tablespoons sugar; whip until the mixture holds 
a line drawn by the whisk. 
5. To assemble: Place 1 crepe on a serving platter. 
Spoon 1 heaping tablespoon preserves on top; 
using an offset spatula, spread in a thin layer over 
the crepe, leaving a   border. Cover with another 
crepe, stacking neatly. Spread 2 heaping tablespoons 
creme-fraiche mixture evenly over the 
crepe, again leaving a   border. Continue alternating 
fillings with crepes, finishing with a crepe 
on top. If necessary, insert 2 long toothpicks 
through the layers to keep the gateau in place. Refrigerate 
at least 15 minutes. Remove the toothpicks; 
cut into wedges before serving. 
 

CAKES 501 


almond-polenta pound cake 

MAKES ONE 4 x 8-INCH LOAF 

1/2 cup (1 stick) unsalted butter, room 
temperature, plus more for the pan 


1 cup cake flour (not self-rising), 
plus more for the pan 


1/3 cup almond paste (31/4 ounces) 
2/3 cup plus 11/2 tablespoons sugar 
1/3 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 


1/3 teaspoon pure almond extract 
2/3 cup heavy cream 


4 large eggs, room temperature, separated 
1/2 cup coarse cornmeal (polenta) 


1 teaspoon baking powder 
1/4 teaspoon salt 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F with a rack in the lower 
third. Butter an 8 x 9 4-inch loaf pan; dust with flour, 
and tap out excess. In the bowl of an electric mixer, 
cut the almond paste into 2/3 cup sugar with 2 forks 
until it resembles coarse meal. Add the butter; using 
the paddle attachment, beat until soft and light, 
about 4 minutes. 
2. In a medium bowl, whisk together the extracts, 
cream, and egg yolks. With the mixer on medium, 
gradually add the cream mixture to the butter mixture. 
In a small bowl, stir together the flour, cornmeal, 
baking powder, and salt. Sift half the flour 
mixture over the butter mixture, and fold to combine. 
Fold in the remaining flour mixture. 
3. In another mixing bowl, beat the egg whites and 
remaining 11/2 tablespoons sugar on medium speed 
to stiff peaks, 2 to 3 minutes. Fold into the batter. 
4. Pour the batter into the prepared pan. Bake until 
a cake tester inserted in the center comes out clean, 
about 1 hour. If the top begins to brown too much, 
cover loosely with foil. Let cool before serving. 
orange-almond cake 

MAKES ONE 9-INCH CAKE 

6 navel or other sweet oranges 

Unsalted butter, room temperature, 
for the pan 


1/2 cup all-purpose flour, plus more 
for the pan 


13/4 cups finely ground blanched almonds 
(about 6 ounces) 

11/2 teaspoons baking powder 
1/2 teaspoon salt 

6 large eggs 
2 cups sugar 


1. Place the whole unpeeled oranges in a large 
saucepan or stockpot, and cover with cold water. 
Bring to a boil over high heat. Reduce heat, and simmer 
gently, 2 hours. Drain; let cool. 
2. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees  F. Butter and flour a 
9-inch springform pan; set aside. Halve the cooked 
oranges, and remove any seeds. Place 7 halves in a 
food processor, and pulse until pureed but still 
chunky. This should yield about 3 cups; set aside. 
3. In a small bowl, whisk together the ground almonds, 
flour, baking powder, and salt; set aside. In 
the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the whisk 
attachment, beat the eggs with 1 cup sugar on 
medium speed until light and fluffy. Stir in the orange 
puree until just combined. Stir in the flour 
mixture; pour into prepared pan. 
4. Bake until the cake is golden brown and a cake 
tester inserted in the center comes out clean, about 
1 hour. Transfer the pan to a wire rack. After 15 minutes, 
run a small spatula or paring knife around the 
edge to loosen the cake; let cool completely. 
5. Meanwhile, make the orange topping: Chop the 
remaining 5 orange halves into   pieces, and 
set aside. In a medium saucepan, combine the remaining 
cup sugar with 3/4 cup water. Bring the mixture 
to a boil, stirring until the sugar has dissolved. 
6. Add the chopped oranges to the saucepan, and 
reduce heat to medium. Simmer gently until most 
of the liquid has evaporated and thickened into a 
syrup, about 15 minutes. Cool completely. 
502 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


7. To assemble, remove the ring from the pan; transfer 
the cooled cake to a serving platter. Arrange the 
chopped oranges and any remaining syrup over the 
top of the cake. Cut into wedges, and serve. Or store, 
covered, in the refrigerator, up to 2 days. 
walnut honey cake 

MAKES ONE 8  CAKE 

3 ounces walnut halves (about 3/4 cup) 

Unsalted butter, room temperature, 

for the pan 

11/2 cups all-purpose flour, plus more 
for the pan 

1 cup raw honey, plus 2 to 3 tablespoons 
more for the glaze 


1 cup unsweetened applesauce 

3 large eggs, room temperature 

3/4 teaspoon baking soda 
1/4 teaspoon salt 
1/4 teaspoon ground ginger 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F, with a rack in the center. 
Spread the walnut in a single layer on a rimmed 
baking sheet. Toast in the oven until fragrant, tossing 
occasionally, 5 to 7 minutes. Transfer to a plate; 
let cool. Pulse in a food processor until finely chopped. 
2. Butter and flour an 8  springform pan; set 
aside. In a large bowl, combine the honey and applesauce; 
whisk until the honey is mostly dissolved. 
Add the eggs, and whisk until fully combined. 
3. Into a medium bowl, sift together the flour, baking 
soda, salt, and ginger. Stir into the honey mixture. 
Using a rubber spatula, fold in the walnuts. 
4. Pour the batter into the prepared pan. Bake the 
cake until golden brown on top and a cake tester inserted 
into center comes out clean, about 55 minutes. 
5. Let cool on a wire rack until the sides of the cake 
begin to pull away from the pan, about 15 minutes. 
Unmold onto a serving plate. While it is still warm, 
use an offset spatula to gently spread the remaining 
honey on top. Serve warm. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 278 CALORIES, 8 G FAT, 

58 MG CHOLESTEROL, 51 G CARBOHYDRATE, 178 MG SODIUM, 

5 G PROTEIN, 1 G FIBER 

bittersweet chocolate 
mousse torte 

MAKES ONE 5 X 9-INCH TORTE 

12 ounces bittersweet chocolate (preferably 
65 percent cacao), chopped 


3 cups heavy cream 
3 tablespoons sugar 


12 ounces crisp oval butter wafer cookies 
(20 total) 


Good-quality unsweetened cocoa 
powder, for dusting 


1. Make the mousse: Put the chocolate in a large 
bowl, and set aside. Heat 11/2 cups cream over 
medium-high heat in a medium saucepan until the 
cream is steaming and small bubbles form on the 
edges. Pour the cream over the chocolate. Stir until 
the mixture is smooth. Let cool completely. 
2. Put the remaining 11/2 cups cream and the sugar 
in the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the whisk 
attachment; beat on medium-high speed until stiff 
peaks form. Using a rubber spatula, fold the 
whipped cream into the chocolate mixture, one 
third at a time. 
3. Assemble the torte: Line a 5 x 9-inch loaf pan 
with plastic wrap, leaving an overhang on the sides. 
Spread enough mousse (3/4 to 1 cup) over the bottom 
of the pan to cover. Arrange 5 cookies on top 
in a single layer to cover, breaking them to fit as 
necessary. Spread enough mousse (3/4 to 1 cup) on 
top to cover; smooth into an even layer. Repeat the 
process with the remaining cookies and mousse 
until the pan is full. 
4. Press plastic wrap directly onto the surface, and 
refrigerate the torte until firm, at least 3 hours or 
up to 2 days. 
5. To serve, remove the plastic wrap from the surface. 
Invert the torte onto a serving plate; unmold, 
using the overhang to coax it out. Remove the plastic 
wrap. Dust with cocoa. 
CAKES 503 


almond-orange financier 

MAKES ONE 4 X 13  TART 

3/4 cup (11/2 sticks) unsalted butter, 
melted, plus more for the pan 
1 cup almonds, lightly toasted (41/2 ounces) 

12/3 cups confectioners' sugar, plus 
more for dusting 

1/2 cup all-purpose flour 
1/4 teaspoon salt 


Finely grated zest of 1 orange 
6 large egg whites, lightly beaten 


Candied Orange Peel (recipe follows), 
for garnish 

1. Preheat the oven to 450 degrees F. Brush the inside of a 
4 x 13  tart pan that has a nonremovable bottom 
with melted butter; transfer to the freezer. 
2. Using a food processor, pulse the almonds until 
finely ground. In a large bowl, combine the ground 
almonds, confectioners' sugar, flour, salt, and orange 
zest. Add the egg whites, and whisk to combine. 
Slowly stir in the butter. 
3. Remove the tart pan from the freezer. Pour the 
batter into the pan; place on a baking sheet. Bake 
until the dough just begins to rise, about 10 minutes. 
Reduce the oven heat to 400 degrees F, and continue 
baking 7 to 8 minutes more, until the financier begins 
to brown. Turn off the oven, and let the cake 
stand in the oven until firm, about 10 minutes. 
Transfer the pan to a wire rack to cool completely. 
4. Invert the financier onto the rack; reinvert, and 
slice into 6 pieces. Garnish the top with candied orange 
peel, and dust with confectioners' sugar. 
candied orange peel 

MAKES 1/2 CUP 

The candied orange peel can be made up to 
3 weeks ahead; store it with the cooking syrup in 
an airtight container in the refrigerator. 

3 oranges 

1 cup sugar 

1. Using a citrus zester or vegetable peeler, shred 
long strips of orange peel. 
2. Place the strips in a medium saucepan. Cover 
with cold water, and bring to a boil over medium 
heat. Drain; repeat 2 more times with fresh water. 
3. Place the sugar in a clean saucepan with 11/2 cups 
water; stir to combine. Bring to a boil over medium 
heat, stirring occasionally, until the sugar has dissolved, 
about 3 minutes. Add the citrus strips to the 
boiling syrup; reduce heat, and simmer until the 
strips are translucent, about 12 minutes. Remove 
from heat; let the strips cool in the syrup, at least 1 
hour. Remove from the syrup when ready to use. 
chocolate hazelnut torte 

MAKES ONE 8  TORTE 

3/4 cup unsalted butter, plus more for the pan 
Unsweetened cocoa powder, for the pan 
and for dusting 
1 cup currants 


1/2 cup whiskey or hot water 
11/3 cups heavy cream 

1 pound bittersweet chocolate, chopped 
6 large eggs 


1 cup sugar 
1/4 teaspoon salt 


11/2 cups finely chopped toasted hazelnuts 
(61/2 ounces) 

1. Preheat the oven to 225 degrees F. Butter an 8  
springform pan; sprinkle with cocoa, and tap out 
excess. In a small bowl, combine the currants and 
whiskey or hot water. Let macerate at least 10 minutes 
or up to 30 minutes. Strain the currants in a 
fine sieve, and discard the whiskey. 
504 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


2. In a small saucepan over medium heat, bring the 
cream and butter almost to a boil, making sure all 
the butter is melted. Place the chocolate in a 
medium heatproof bowl, and pour the cream over 
it to cover. Whisk gently until the chocolate is 
melted and the mixture is combined. 
3. In a medium bowl, whisk together the eggs, sugar, 
and salt. Whisk into the chocolate mixture, and stir 
in the nuts and currants. Pour the mixture into the 
prepared pan. 
4. Bake until the edges are set and the center is still 
a little soft to the touch, about 2 hours. Transfer to 
a wire rack to cool completely. Cover with plastic 
wrap, and chill overnight in the refrigerator. When 
ready to serve, remove from the refrigerator, and 
dust with cocoa powder. 
molten chocolate cakes 

MAKES 6 SMALL CAKES 

Because the batter needs to be frozen before baking 
(and can remain in the freezer, covered with 
plastic wrap, for up to 1 month), these cakes are 
perfect for those unexpected moments when you 
need a quick dessert. Using semisweet chocolate 
in the truffles is essential; if bittersweet is used, 
the centers of the cakes will not ooze. 

6 tablespoons unsalted butter, room 
temperature, plus more for the ring molds 


12 ounces semisweet chocolate 
5 large eggs, separated 


10 tablespoons sugar 
1/2 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 


6 Chocolate Truffles (recipe follows) 
Earl Grey Ice Cream (recipe follows) 


Chocolate curls, for garnish (optional) 

1. Butter 6 ring molds measuring 21/2 inches high 
and 23/4 inches in diameter. Place on a baking sheet 
lined with parchment paper, and set aside. 
2. Place the chocolate and butter in a medium heatproof 
bowl set over a pan of simmering water, and 
heat until melted. Stir the mixture to combine. 
3. Combine the egg yolks and 6 tablespoons sugar 
in a large bowl, and whisk until the mixture is pale 
yellow and thick, 3 to 5 minutes. Stir in the vanilla 
extract. Add the chocolate mixture to the egg yolk 
mixture, and stir to combine. 
4. Place the egg whites in the bowl of an electric 
mixer fitted with the whisk attachment, and beat 
until frothy. Add the remaining 4 tablespoons sugar, 
and whisk until stiff peaks form. Fold the egg white 
mixture into the chocolate mixture. 
5. Spoon about 1/4 cup batter into each ring, and 
place a truffle in the center of each. Spoon the remaining 
batter over the truffles, and place in the 
freezer to set, at least 1 hour. 
6. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Transfer the baking 
sheet with the filled ring molds to the oven; bake 
20 to 25 minutes, or until the sides are set but the 
centers are still soft. Using a thin spatula, carefully 
transfer the cakes (still in the ring molds) to a serving 
plate. Lift the ring molds, and remove them. 
Serve the cakes warm with Earl Grey ice cream; garnish 
with chocolate curls, if desired. 
chocolate truffles 

MAKES 6 

4 ounces semisweet chocolate, 
finely chopped 


3/4 cup heavy cream 
Place the chocolate in a medium heatproof bowl. 
Bring the heavy cream to a boil in a small saucepan, 
and pour it over the chocolate. Let sit for 5 minutes, 
and stir until thoroughly combined. Place the mixture 
in the freezer until set, about 45 minutes, stirring 
every 15 minutes. Divide the mixture into 6 
equal parts, and roll each into a ball. Cover the truffles 
with plastic wrap; freeze until ready to use. 

CAKES 505 


earl grey ice cream 

MAKES ABOUT 5 CUPS 

Two tablespoons of loose tea leaves may be substituted 
for the tea bags in this recipe. If you use 
loose tea, you will need to strain the tea mixture 
before combining it with the egg yolks. 

8 large egg yolks 

1/2 cup sugar 
2 cups milk 


2 cups heavy cream 
4 Earl Grey tea bags 


1. Prepare an ice-water bath, and set aside. Combine 
the egg yolks and sugar in the bowl of an electric 
mixer fitted with the whisk attachment, and beat 
until pale yellow and very thick, 3 to 5 minutes. 
2. Place the milk, cream, and tea bags in a medium 
saucepan, and bring the mixture to a boil. Remove 
from heat; cover, and let steep for 10 minutes. Remove 
the tea bags, and return the mixture to a boil. 
Gradually pour half of the milk mixture into the egg 
yolk mixture, whisking constantly. Return the combined 
mixture to the saucepan. 
3. Cook the combined mixture over medium-low heat, 
whisking constantly, until thick enough to coat the 
back of a spoon. Strain into a bowl set in the ice bath, 
and chill completely; stirring occasionally. Freeze in 
an ice-cream maker, according to the manufacturer's 
instructions, until the ice cream just holds its shape. 
Transfer the ice cream to a metal loaf pan; cover with 
plastic wrap, and freeze until firm, at least 2 hours. 
breton butter cake 

MAKES ONE 9-INCH CAKE 

1 cup (2 sticks) unsalted butter, room 
temperature, plus more for the pan 


1 cup sugar 

1 tablespoon pure vanilla extract 
6 large egg yolks 


23/4 cups all-purpose flour 
1/4 teaspoon salt 

1 large whole egg, lightly beaten 
Strawberry Compote (recipe follows) 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Cream the butter and 
sugar in the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with 
paddle attachment until light and fluffy. Beat in the 
vanilla and yolks 1 at a time, beating well after each 
addition. Add the flour and salt; beat just until combined. 
Do not overmix. 
2. Transfer the batter to a 9-inch tart pan with a removable 
bottom; with a small offset spatula, spread 
the batter and smooth the top. (If necessary, chill 
the batter 10 minutes before smoothing.) Place the 
pan in the refrigerator 15 minutes. 
3. Remove from the refrigerator. Brush the top with 
beaten egg, and mark a criss-cross pattern with a 
fork. Brush again with the egg. Bake until the cake 
is deep golden brown and the edges pull away from 
the sides of the pan, about 50 minutes. 
4. Transfer to a wire rack to cool slightly. Remove 
the cake from the pan, and slice while still warm. 
Serve with strawberry compote. 
strawberry compote 

MAKES ABOUT 3 CUPS 

11/2 pounds strawberries, stemmed and cut 
lengthwise into 6 segments 

2 tablespoons Grand Marnier 

1 tablespoon finely grated orange zest 

11/2 cups fresh orange juice, strained 

1. Combine the berries, Grand Marnier, and zest 
in a small bowl. Toss; let stand 30 minutes. 
2. Bring the juice to a boil in a small saucepan over 
medium heat; reduce heat, and simmer until the liquid 
is reduced to 1/4 cup, about 20 minutes. Remove 
from heat; let cool. Pour over the strawberries, and 
toss to combine. 
506 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


belgian chocolate birthday cake 

MAKES ONE 9-INCH CAKE 

Toast and peel the nuts for the cake and the garnish 
(recipe follows) at the same time. Bake the 
cake up to 3 days ahead; wrap well and keep at 
room temperature. The candied hazelnuts and 
chocolate curls can also be made 3 days ahead; 
store in airtight containers. 

4 ounces hazelnuts 

131/3 tablespoons unsalted butter (12/3 sticks), 
softened 

2/3 cup Dutch-process cocoa powder 

6 tablespoons granulated sugar 

12/3 cups all-purpose flour 

11/2 teaspoons baking soda 

1/4 teaspoon salt 

2/3 cup boiling water 

13/4 cups packed dark-brown sugar 

4 large eggs, at room temperature 

11/3 cups buttermilk, at room temperature 

21/2 teaspoons pure vanilla extract 

Ganache Glaze (page 509) 

Candied Hazelnuts and Chocolate Curls 

(recipe follows) 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Spread the nuts on a 
baking sheet. Bake until fragrant and toasted, about 
12 minutes. Transfer to a clean kitchen towel; rub 
to loosen the skins. Butter a 9 x   springform 
pan well; coat with cocoa, tapping out any excess. 
2. In a food processor, grind the nuts with the granulated 
sugar until fine but not pasty; transfer to a 
large bowl; stir in the flour, baking soda, and salt. 
3. In a heatproof bowl, whisk together the cocoa and 
boiling water until smooth. (The mixture will 
thicken as it cools.) 
4. In the bowl of an electric mixer, cream the butter 
and brown sugar on high until lightened and 
fluffy, 3 to 4 minutes. Beat in the eggs 1 at a time 
until well blended. 
5. Stir the buttermilk and vanilla into the cocoa mixture. 
Mixing on low, add half the dry ingredients to 
the creamed mixture; when blended, pour in the 
cocoa mixture, and add the remaining dry mixture, 
mixing just until incorporated. Scrape the batter 
into the prepared pan; smooth the top. Bake 1 hour 
to 1 hour and 10 minutes, until a tester inserted in 
the center comes out clean. Let cool in the pan for 
10 minutes; remove from the pan and cool completely. 
Place the cooled cake on a 9-inch cardboard 
round. 

6. Place half the ganache in a bowl; place in a larger 
bowl of ice water; whip with a balloon whisk until 
lighter in color and spreadable. 
7. Spread the whipped ganache smoothly on the 
top and sides of the cooled cake, and chill the cake. 
Gently stir the remaining ganache every 5 minutes 
until thickened and cool. 
8. Place the cake (still on the cardboard round) on 
a wire rack over a sheet of waxed or parchment 
paper. Working with a small ladle, pour the ganache 
over the top of the cake, moving the ladle in a circular 
fashion while in contact with the cake, letting 
the ganache run down the sides. Scrape up the excess 
and reserve for another use. Let the cake stand 
at room temperature until set. Garnish with nuts 
and chocolate curls. 
candied hazelnuts and chocolate curls 

MAKES ENOUGH FOR ONE 9-INCH CAKE 

2 cups hazelnuts 
1 cup sugar 


2 tablespoons water 
1 pound bittersweet chocolate, 
very finely chopped 
1/4 cup unsweetened cocoa 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Spread the nuts on a 
baking sheet. Bake until fragrant and toasted, about 
12 minutes. Transfer to a clean kitchen towel; rub 
to loosen the skins. 
2. Place the sugar and water in a medium heavy 
skillet. Stir with a fork over medium-high heat until 
dissolved; let boil undisturbed for 3 minutes. Add 
the nuts to the pan; stir with a wooden spoon until 
the caramel seizes around the nuts. Transfer to a 
parchment-lined baking sheet; let cool completely. 
CAKES 507 


3. Once the nuts are cool, place half the chopped 
chocolate in a deep, medium-size stainless-steel 
bowl. Place the bowl over a saucepan with 1 inch 
of simmering water; stir until the chocolate is 
melted and hot. Add the remaining chocolate to the 
bowl; remove the bowl from the pan of water; let 
stand about 5 minutes, and then stir until smooth. 
4. Pour half the chocolate onto an inverted baking 
sheet; spread with a bench scraper until 1/8 inch 
thick or slightly thinner (chocolate should be 
opaque on the surface). Let stand until just tacky. 
Hold the scraper at a 45-degree angle; scrape the 
chocolate off the surface. The curls can be stored 
in an airtight container layered with parchment at 
room temperature. 
5. While the chocolate sets, add the candied nuts 
to the remaining chocolate in the bowl, and stir 
until coated. Spread the nuts on a parchment-lined 
baking sheet, and let stand until set. 
6. Sift the cocoa powder on top of the dried nuts 
and toss to coat. Store in a resealable plastic bag 
for up to 1 week, until ready to use. 
inside-out german 
chocolate torte 

MAKES ONE 9-INCH TORTE 

The chocolate glaze takes time to cool; have it 
ready before assembling the torte. 

10 tablespoons (11/4 sticks) unsalted 
butter, plus more for the pan 


7 ounces bittersweet chocolate 

11/4 cups all-purpose flour 
1/4 teaspoon salt 

1 cup sugar 
2 large eggs 


2 teaspoons pure vanilla extract 

Coconut-Pecan Filling 
(recipe follows) 


Ganache Glaze (recipe follows) 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees  F. Butter two 9-inch 
springform pans. Line the bottoms with parchment 
paper, and butter the paper; set aside. Place the 
chocolate and butter in a heatproof bowl, and set 
over a pan of barely simmering water. Stir occasionally 
until melted; set aside. 
2. Sift together the flour and salt; set aside. Place 
the sugar and eggs in the bowl of an electric mixer 
fitted with the paddle attachment, and beat until 
fluffy and well combined, 3 to 5 minutes. Add the 
vanilla and chocolate mixture, and stir to combine. 
Add the dry ingredients, and stir to combine. Divide 
the batter between the 2 pans, using an offset 
spatula to distribute the batter evenly, and smooth 
the layers. Bake until the center is set, about 20 minutes. 
Transfer the pans to a wire rack to cool completely 
before unmolding. 
3. Place 1 layer on a 9-inch cardboard cake round. 
Spread filling over the layer, and invert the second 
layer onto the top, leaving the smooth side up. Press 
down gently on the top layer to evenly distribute 
the filling to the edges. Using a metal spatula, 
smooth the filling flush with the sides of the cake. 
Refrigerate until ready to glaze. 
4. Carefully transfer the torte off the cardboard 
round onto a wire rack set over a baking pan. Pour 
enough ganache glaze over the cake to fully coat it, 
shaking the pan gently to help spread the ganache, 
if necessary. Let sit for 15 to 20 minutes. The 
ganache in the pan may be melted and strained 
through a fine sieve and added back to the glaze. 
5. Pour the remaining glaze over the torte, allowing 
excess to drip off the sides. If the top is not smooth, 
gently shake the pan or run an offset spatula 
quickly over the surface. Allow to set at least 30 
minutes before serving. Carefully slide the cake off 
the wire rack and onto a serving platter. 
508 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


coconut-pecan filling 

MAKES ABOUT 2 CUPS; 
ENOUGH FOR ONE 9-INCH TORTE 


1 14-ounce can sweetened condensed milk 

10 tablespoons (11/4 sticks) unsalted butter 
1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 
4 large egg yolks 
2 cups shredded sweetened coconut 


11/2 cups finely chopped pecans 

1. Place the milk, butter, and vanilla in a medium 
saucepan, and cook over medium-low heat, stirring 
occasionally, until melted and combined. 
2. Whisk the egg yolks in a medium bowl, and, 
whisking constantly, add some of the hot milk mixture 
to the egg yolks until combined. Whisk the 
mixture back into the saucepan, and cook, stirring 
constantly with a wooden spoon, until the mixture 
thickens slightly, about 5 minutes. 
3. Remove from heat, and stir in the coconut and 
pecans. Cool completely, and refrigerate in an airtight 
container until ready to use, up to 2 days. 
ganache glaze 

MAKES ABOUT 4 CUPS 

This ganache thickens as it sits. The ganache 
used for the Inside-Out German Chocolate Torte 
and in step 7 of the Belgian Chocolate Birthday 
Cake (page 507) should be pourable but thick 
enough to fully coat the cakes. 

1 pound bittersweet or semisweet chocolate 
21/2 cups heavy cream 

1. Chop the chocolate finely using a serrated knife; 
place in a large heatproof bowl. 
2. Bring the cream to a boil over medium-high heat; 
pour directly over the chopped chocolate. Allow 
to sit 10 minutes. Use a rubber spatula to gently stir 
the chocolate and cream until well combined and 
smooth. Let sit at room temperature until cooled 
and just thickened, stirring occasionally, about 30 
minutes but up to 1 hour, depending on the temperature 
of the room. 
raspberry-filled layer cake 

MAKES ONE 8-INCH 4-LAYER CAKE 

The fluffy exterior of this cake conceals a delicious 
pink filling, made simply by combining 
some of the frosting with raspberry jam. 

12 tablespoons (11/2 sticks) unsalted 
butter, softened, plus more for the pans 
and wire racks 


3 cups sifted cake flour (not self-rising), 
plus more for the pans 


4 teaspoons baking powder 

1/2 teaspoon salt 
11/2 cups sugar 

1 cup milk 
1 tablespoon pure vanilla extract 


4 large egg whites 

Seven-Minute Frosting 
(page 658) 


1 cup raspberry jam 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Butter two 8 x   
professional round cake pans, and line the bottom 
with parchment rounds. Butter the parchment; dust 
the pans with flour, tapping out excess. Set aside. 
2. Sift together the cake flour, baking powder, and 
salt into a medium bowl, and set aside. Beat the butter 
in the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the 
paddle attachment, until it is creamy. Add the sugar 
to the butter in a steady stream, and continue beating 
until the butter is light and fluffy, about 3 minutes. 
Reduce speed to low. Add the dry ingredients 
alternately with the milk and vanilla in 3 additions, 
starting and finishing with the dry; be careful not 
to overmix. Set the batter aside. 
3. In a medium metal bowl or clean bowl of an electric 
mixer, whisk the egg whites just until stiff peaks 
form. Fold one-third of the egg whites into the batter 
until combined. Fold in the remaining whites in 
2 batches. Divide the batter between the prepared 
pans, and smooth the tops with a metal spatula. 
4. Bake until a tester inserted near the center comes 
out clean and the cake springs back when pressed 
lightly in the center, about 30 minutes. Let the pans 
cool 15 minutes on a wire rack before unmolding. 
CAKES 509 


Loosen the sides with a small metal spatula or paring 
knife, and invert onto the greased wire racks. 
To prevent the layers from splitting, invert again so 
the tops are up. Cool completely before assembling 
the cake or wrapping airtight to freeze cake for later. 

5. If the cakes are not level, use a serrated knife to 
trim the tops off. Carefully slice each cake horizontally 
into 2 equal layers. (You will have 4 layers.) 
Place one-third of the frosting in a bowl, and fold 
in the raspberry jam. 
6. To assemble, place 1 sliced layer on an 8-inch 
cardboard cake round. Spread the top with 1/4 inch 
raspberry frosting. Repeat with the remaining layers 
and remaining raspberry frosting, placing the 
final layer bottom side up. Lightly coat the assembled 
cake with a thin layer of white frosting to protect 
against crumbs in the frosting. Finish with the 
remaining frosting. Serve immediately, or keep refrigerated 
until ready to serve. 
caramel cake 

MAKES ONE 9-INCH LAYER CAKE 

This cake can be stored in an airtight container 
at room temperature for up to 3 days. 

11/4 cups (21/2 sticks) unsalted butter, softened, 
plus more for the pan and rack 

41/2 cups sifted cake flour (not self-rising), 
plus more for the pan 

2 tablespoons baking powder 

3/4 teaspoon salt 
11/2 cups milk 

11/2 tablespoons pure vanilla extract 
21/4 cups sugar 

7 large egg whites 

Caramel Frosting (recipe follows) 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Butter two 9 x   
round cake pans. Line the bottom with parchment 
paper; butter the parchment and sides of the pan; 
dust with flour, tapping out excess. Set aside. Sift 
together the flour, baking powder, and salt into a 
medium bowl; set aside. In another bowl, combine 
the milk and vanilla, and set aside. 
2. Beat the butter in the bowl of an electric mixer 
fitted with the paddle attachment until it is creamy. 
With the machine running, add the sugar in a 
steady stream; continue beating until the mixture 
is light and fluffy, about 3 minutes. Reduce speed 
to low. Add the flour mixture in 3 batches, alternating 
with the milk mixture and starting and ending 
with the flour. Be careful to avoid overbeating; 
set aside. 
3. In a clean bowl of an electric mixer fitted with 
the whisk attachment, beat the egg whites until stiff 
peaks form. Gently fold one-third of the whites into 
the batter to lighten, and then fold in the remaining 
whites in 2 batches. 
4. Divide the batter between the prepared pans, and 
smooth the tops with an offset spatula. Bake until 
a cake tester inserted in the centers comes out clean 
and the cakes spring back when pressed lightly in 
the center, about 40 minutes. 
5. Transfer the pans to a wire rack; let cool 15 minutes. 
Brush the rack with butter. Loosen the sides 
of the cake with a paring knife; invert onto the 
greased rack. Reinvert the cake to prevent it from 
splitting; let cool completely. 
6. Using a serrated knife, slice the domed tops off 
the cakes; discard. Place 1 layer cut side up, on a 
serving platter; spread a layer of caramel frosting 
on top. Stack the second layer, cut side down, on 
top; generously spread the top and sides of both 
cakes with frosting. To serve, cut into wedges. 
caramel frosting 

MAKES ABOUT 5 CUPS 

5 cups sugar 

1 cup water 

2 cups heavy cream 

1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 

3/4 cup (11/2 sticks) unsalted butter, 
cut into pieces 
1. Bring 4 cups sugar and the water to a boil in a 
medium saucepan over medium heat, stirring until 
the sugar has dissolved, about 8 minutes; wash 
510 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


down the sides of the pan with a pastry brush 
dipped in water to prevent crystals from forming. 
Raise heat to high; gently swirl the pan (do not stir) 
until the caramel is a deep amber color, about 10 
minutes. Remove from heat. 

2. Meanwhile, heat the cream and remaining cup 
sugar in a small saucepan over medium heat until 
the sugar dissolves, stirring frequently, about 5 minutes. 
Turn off heat; cover, and set aside. 
3. As soon as the caramel is the desired color, add 
the hot cream mixture in a slow, steady stream, stirring 
to combine. Be careful, as the caramel may 
splatter when the hot cream is added. Stir in the 
vanilla, and continue stirring until the mixture no 
longer bubbles. 
4. Prepare an ice-water bath. Transfer the mixture 
to the bowl of an electric mixer, and place in the ice 
bath, stirring until it is cool. Transfer the bowl to 
the mixer; using the paddle attachment, beat on 
medium speed 5 minutes. With the machine running, 
gradually add the butter, a few pieces at a time, 
beating to incorporate fully. Let the frosting stand 
20 minutes to thicken before using. 
pastel de tres leches 

SERVES 12 

The most time-consuming step is making the coconut 
curls; in a pinch, you can use store-bought 
shaved coconut. 

1 stick butter (8 tablespoons), melted 
and cooled, plus more for the pans 


6 large eggs, separated 

1/4 teaspoon baking soda 
1/4 teaspoon salt 


1 cup sugar 
1 cup all-purpose flour 


21/2 cups milk 
1 12-ounce can evaporated milk 

1 14-ounce can sweetened condensed milk 
1 fresh coconut 


2 cups heavy cream 

Assorted tropical fruits, such 
as pineapple, star fruit, mango, and 
pepino, for garnish 


1. Heat the oven to 350 degrees  F. Generously butter a 
9 x 1  glass baking pan. In an electric mixer 
fitted with the whisk attachment, combine the egg 
whites, baking soda, and salt, and beat on medium 
speed until soft peaks form, 2 to 3 minutes. 
2. Add the yolks to the whites, beat until combined. 
With the mixer running slowly, add the sugar until 
combined. Remove the bowl from the mixer. Using 
a rubber spatula, fold in the butter. 
3. Sift 1/4 cup flour on top of the mixture, and fold in 
to combine. Repeat with the remaining flour, folding 
in 1/4 cup at a time. Pour the batter into the prepared 
pan, and bake until golden and a cake tester 
inserted into the middle comes out clean, 20 to 25 
minutes. Remove from the oven, and transfer to a 
wire rack. 
4. About 5 minutes before the cake is done, whisk 
together the 3 milks, and set aside. As soon as the 
cake is removed from the oven, pour the milk mixture 
over the entire cake. The cake should absorb 
all the liquid within 3 to 5 minutes. Set the cake 
aside, and let stand until cool. Cover the cake well, 
and transfer to the refrigerator to chill, at least 
5 hours or overnight. 
5. Before serving, heat the oven to 450 degrees F. Place the 
whole coconut in the oven, and bake for 20 minutes. 
Remove from the oven, and, using an awl or a screwdriver, 
pierce the 3 eyes of the coconut. Turn over, 
and drain the liquid. Using a hammer, break open 
the coconut. To remove the meat from the shell, insert 
a small spatula or grapefruit knife between the 
flesh and the shell to pry the meat out in large 
pieces. Using a vegetable peeler, shave off thin curls 
of coconut. Transfer the curls to a baking sheet, and 
let stand uncovered for 30 minutes. Place in the 
oven, and bake until the edges are golden, about 10 
minutes. Remove from the oven, and set aside until 
cool. The curls can be stored in an airtight container 
for up to 5 days, or frozen for future use. 
6. When ready to serve the cake, whip the cream to 
soft peaks. Slice cake into 12 servings, top with 
whipped cream, and serve with the fruits and 
toasted coconut curls. 
CAKES 511 


coconut pecan cake 

MAKES ONE 9-INCH LAYER CAKE 

For Valentine's Day, bake the layers in two 9-inch 
heart-shaped cake pans. 

3/4 cup (11/2 sticks) unsalted butter, room 
temperature, plus more for the pans 
21/4 cups all-purpose flour, plus more 
for the pans 

1 cup firmly packed sweetened 
shredded coconut 


3/4 cup pecan halves (3 ounces), toasted 
2 cups sugar 
1 tablespoon baking powder 

3/4 teaspoon salt 
1/4 cup creamed coconut or unsalted butter 
4 large eggs 


1 tablespoon pure coconut extract 

1 cup plus 2 tablespoons unsweetened 
coconut milk (9 ounces) 


Coconut Cake Filling (recipe follows) 
Milk Chocolate Ganache (recipe follows) 

2 cups toasted shaved coconut, 
for garnish (optional) 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees  F. Butter two 9-inch 
round cake pans. Line the bottoms with parchment. 
Butter the parchment, and dust with flour; tap out 
excess, and set aside. 
2. In a food processor, finely grind the coconut; 
transfer to a bowl. Finely grind the pecans with 2 
tablespoons sugar, and set aside. Into a large bowl, 
sift together the flour, baking powder, and salt; stir 
in the ground coconut and pecans. Set aside. 
3. In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the 
paddle attachment, beat the butter, creamed coconut, 
and remaining sugar on medium-high speed 
until light and fluffy, about 4 minutes. Beat in the 
eggs and coconut extract. Beat in the flour mixture 
in 3 batches, alternating with the coconut milk and 
starting and ending with flour. 
4. Divide the batter between the prepared pans; 
smooth the tops. Bake until golden and a cake tester 
inserted in the centers comes out clean, about 35 
minutes. If the tops begin to get too dark, cover 
loosely with foil. Let cool in the pans 30 minutes. 
Run a knife around the edges of the cakes; invert 
onto a wire rack. Reinvert; let cool completely. 

5. Line 2 rimmed baking sheets with plastic wrap; 
fit 1 with a cooling rack. Use a serrated knife to trim 
the tops of the cake layers, if desired. Transfer 1 layer 
to baking sheet with rack; spread with filling. Place 
the remaining cake layer on top. 
6. Using an offset spatula, spread 1 cup chilled 
ganache on the sides of the cake; smooth with a 
bench scraper. Pour the remaining ganache over 
the cake, coating completely. Transfer the cake and 
rack to the other baking sheet; chill until set, about 
5 minutes. Scrape the excess ganache back into 
bowl, passing it through a sieve. 
7. Coat the cake again with ganache. Chill until set, 
about 5 minutes. Press toasted coconut on the sides 
of the cake, if desired. Keep at room temperature 
until ready to serve. 
coconut cake filling 

MAKES ENOUGH FOR ONE 9-INCH CAKE 

1 cup sweetened shredded coconut 

3/4 cup sweetened condensed milk 
4 tablespoons unsalted butter, room 
temperature 


1 tablespoon creamed coconut or unsalted 
butter, room temperature 

2 large egg yolks, lightly beaten 

1 tablespoon pure coconut extract 

1. In a food processor, coarsely grind the coconut; 
set aside. Combine the milk, butter, and creamed coconut 
in a small saucepan over medium-low heat; 
cook, stirring, 3 to 4 minutes. Whisk one-third of the 
hot milk mixture into the egg yolks. Return the mixture 
to the saucepan; cook, stirring constantly, until 
the consistency of pudding, about 5 minutes. 
2. Remove the pan from the heat. Stir in the coconut 
extract and reserved coconut. Let cool completely. Refrigerate 
in an airtight container up to 3 days; let stand 
at room temperature until soft enough to spread. 
512 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


milk chocolate ganache 

MAKES ENOUGH FOR ONE 9-INCH CAKE 

11/2 pounds best-quality milk chocolate, 
finely chopped 

2 cups plus 2 tablespoons heavy cream 
1 teaspoon light corn syrup 


1. Prepare an ice-water bath; set aside. Place the 
chocolate in a medium heatproof bowl; set aside. 
Bring the cream to a boil in a small saucepan; pour 
over the chocolate, swirling to cover completely. Let 
stand until the chocolate has melted, about 5 minutes. 
Add the corn syrup; whisk until smooth. 
2. Pour 1 cup ganache into a bowl set in the ice bath; 
stir until thick and spreadable. Keep the remaining 
ganache at room temperature, stirring every 15 minutes, 
until thick enough to coat the back of a spoon, 
12 to 15 minutes. Use immediately. 
rhubarb and 
blackberry snack cake 

MAKES ONE 41/4 x 13  CAKE 

Draining the rhubarb keeps the cake from becoming 
soggy. 

4 tablespoons unsalted butter, softened, 
plus more for the pan 


1/2 cup all-purpose flour, plus more 
for the pan 


5 ounces rhubarb, cut into  -thick 
slices (scant 11/2 cups) 


1 cup plus 1 tablespoon sugar 

1/2 teaspoon baking powder 
Pinch of coarse salt 


2 large eggs 
1 vanilla bean 


1 large handful blackberries (about 1/3 cup) 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees  F. Butter and flour a 
41/4 x 13  fluted tart pan with a removable bottom. 
Combine the rhubarb and 1/3 cup sugar in a 
medium bowl, and allow to sit, stirring occasionally, 
until the rhubarb has released its juice and the 
sugar has dissolved, about 45 minutes. 
2. Sift the flour, baking powder, and salt into a small 
bowl; set aside. Cream the butter with 2/3 cup sugar 
in the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle 
attachment. Add the eggs, 1 at a time, beating 
well after each addition. Slice the vanilla bean in 
half lengthwise. Scrape the seeds from the pod, and 
add the seeds to the mixture. Beat to combine. Add 
the reserved flour mixture, and beat to combine. 
Using a rubber spatula, spoon the batter into the 
prepared pan, and spread flat. 

3. Strain the rhubarb, discarding the juice; add the 
blackberries, and toss to combine. Spoon the fruit 
on top of the batter in the pan, sprinkle with the 
remaining tablespoon sugar, place in the oven, and 
bake until the cake is golden and center is set, about 
1 hour. Remove from the oven, and place on a wire 
rack to cool slightly before removing the tart pan. 
sunken chocolate cakes 
with coffee ice cream 


MAKES 4 SMALL CAKES 

Coating the muffin tins with butter and sugar 
gives these little chocolate cakes sparkle and a 
bit of crunch. 

8 tablespoons (1 stick) unsalted butter, 
cut into pieces, plus more for the pans 


1/4 cup sugar, plus more for the pans 

5 ounces best-quality bittersweet chocolate, 
coarsely chopped 


2 large eggs, separated, plus 2 large 
egg yolks 


4 scoops coffee ice cream (1 pint) 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Lightly butter 4 cups 
in a jumbo nonstick muffin pan, leaving the 2 center 
cups empty. Coat lightly with sugar, and set 
aside. Place the butter and chocolate in a heatproof 
bowl; set over a pan of simmering water. Stir occasionally, 
until melted and thoroughly combined. Remove 
from heat; set aside. 
2. Combine the 4 egg yolks with 2 tablespoons 
sugar, and whisk until the mixture is pale yellow 
and thick. Stir in the melted chocolate mixture. 
3. Whisk the egg whites until soft peaks form, add 
the remaining 2 tablespoons sugar, and whisk until 
stiff and shiny but not dry. Fold into the chocolate 
mixture. Divide the batter among the prepared muf-
CAKES 513 


fin cups, and bake until set and slightly springy to 
the touch, about 25 minutes. 

4. Remove from the oven, and transfer to a wire 
rack. Allow to cool for 15 minutes in the pan; carefully 
run a knife around the edges of the cakes, and 
unmold. Serve each cake with a scoop of coffee 
ice cream. 
pear-cranberry 
upside-down cake 

MAKES ONE 10-INCH CAKE 

12 tablespoons (11/2 sticks) unsalted butter 

13/4 cups firmly packed light-brown sugar 
3 firm but ripe pears, such as Anjou 

Juice of 1 lemon 
1 cup fresh cranberries 


21/2 cups all-purpose flour 
21/2 teaspoons baking powder 

1/2 teaspoon salt 
1/2 teaspoon ground cinnamon 


1/4 teaspoon ground ginger 
3 large eggs 


1 cup milk, room temperature 
Spice Ice Cream (recipe follows) 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees  F. Combine 6 tablespoons 
butter and 3/4 cup brown sugar in a medium 
skillet, and cook over medium-high heat, stirring 
constantly, until melted and thoroughly combined, 
about 6 minutes. Pour into a 10 x   professional 
round cake pan. 
2. Peel the pears, core, and slice into  -thick 
wedges. Coat with lemon juice, and arrange on top 
of the brown sugar mixture in a spiral pattern 
around the edge of the pan. Fan out the slices in the 
center. Sprinkle 1/2 cup cranberries over the pears, 
and set aside. 
3. Sift the flour, baking powder, salt, cinnamon, and 
ginger together in a medium bowl; set aside. Combine 
the remaining 6 tablespoons butter and cup of 
brown sugar in the bowl of an electric mixer, and beat 
until well combined. Add the eggs, one at a time, 
beating after each addition. Add the milk alternately 
with the flour mixture, beginning and ending with 
flour; beat until smooth. Stir in the remaining 1/2 cup 
cranberries; pour over the fruit in the pan. 

4. Bake until a cake tester inserted into the center 
comes out clean, about 40 minutes. Transfer to a 
wire rack to cool for 15 minutes. Run a knife around 
the edges and invert onto a serving platter. Serve 
with spice ice cream. 
spice ice cream 

MAKES ABOUT 11/2 QUARTS 

1 vanilla bean, split and scraped 
4 cinnamon sticks 
1 whole star anise (optional) 
2 cups milk 
6 large egg yolks 


3/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons sugar 
2 cups heavy cream, very cold 
1. Place the vanilla bean and scrapings, cinnamon 
sticks, and star anise (if using) in a saucepan with 
milk over medium-high heat. Bring the mixture to a 
simmer, cover, and remove from heat. Allow to steep 
for 30 minutes; then strain, discarding the solids. 
2. Combine the egg yolks and sugar in a bowl, and 
whisk until pale yellow and thick, about 3 minutes. 
3. Fill a large bowl with ice and water; set aside. Return 
the milk to the stove, and bring just to a simmer. 
Slowly pour the milk mixture into the yolk mixture, 
whisking constantly. Return it to the saucepan, and 
cook over low heat, stirring constantly, until the mixture 
is thick enough to coat the back of a spoon, 
about 5 minutes. The custard should retain a line 
drawn across the back of the spoon with your finger. 
4. Remove the pan from the heat, and immediately 
stir in the cold cream. Pass through a fine-mesh 
strainer into a bowl set in the ice bath. Stir occasionally 
until cool. Cover the bowl, and place in the 
refrigerator until well chilled, preferably overnight. 
5. Pour the custard into an ice-cream maker; churn 
according to the manufacturer's instructions, until 
the ice cream is just set. Transfer to an airtight container, 
and freeze at least 4 hours or up to 1 week. 
514 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


chestnut chocolate layer cake 

MAKES ONE 9-INCH LAYER CAKE 

This cake is best when served the day it is made. 
You can bake the cake in the morning and finish 
it later in the day. It can stand in a cool place for 
about 3 hours before serving. Marrons glaces 
(whole candied chestnuts) are available in specialty 
food stores. 

Unsalted butter, for the pans 

14 ounces fresh chestnuts 

1 cup sugar 

4 large eggs, room temperature, separated 

1/2 teaspoon cream of tartar 

2/3 cup sifted cake flour (not self-rising) 

3/4 cup sifted chestnut flour 
2 teaspoons baking powder 

1/2 teaspoon ground cinnamon 

1/4 teaspoon salt 

1/2 cup water 

1/2 cup vegetable oil 

1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 

6 ounces semisweet chocolate, 
very finely ground 


2 cups Pastry Cream (page 655) 

Chocolate Ganache (recipe follows) 

8 marrons glaces (optional) 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Butter two 9 x   
round professional baking pans, and line the bottoms 
with parchment. Butter the parchment, and 
set aside. 
2. Using a chestnut knife or a small paring knife, 
make an incision about 1/8 inch deep through the 
shell and into the flesh of each chestnut almost all 
the way around the circumference of the nut. Transfer 
to a chestnut pan or rimmed baking pan. Roast 
in the oven until the chestnuts are tender, about 
35 minutes. Turn the oven off. Leaving the pan with 
the chestnuts in the oven, remove several at a time. 
Working quickly, place 1 chestnut in a towel, and, 
holding both, peel the chestnut while still hot. Remove 
and discard the shells and inner skin; let cool 
completely. Transfer the chestnuts to the bowl of a 
food processor. Add 2 tablespoons sugar, and pulse 
until very finely ground; set aside. Reduce the oven 
temperature to 325 degrees F. 

3. Place the egg whites and cream of tartar in the 
bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the whisk attachment. 
Beat until foamy on medium-low speed, 
5 to 6 minutes. With the mixer running, slowly add 
1/2 cup sugar. Raise speed to medium-high; beat 
until stiff peaks form, 6 to 7 minutes. Transfer the 
egg white mixture to a bowl. 
4. Into the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the 
paddle attachment, sift together the cake flour, 
chestnut flour, baking powder, cinnamon, salt, and 
remaining 6 tablespoons sugar. Add the egg yolks, 
water, oil, and vanilla; beat on medium speed until 
smooth and well combined, about 1 minute. 
5. Using a rubber spatula, carefully and gently fold 
the flour mixture in 4 or 5 additions into the egg 
white mixture until well combined. Gently fold in 
the reserved chestnuts and chocolate. Evenly divide 
the batter between the prepared cake pans. 
6. Bake on the same shelf, rotating the pans halfway 
through baking, until golden and a cake tester inserted 
into the centers of the cakes come out clean, 
about 65 minutes. Transfer to a wire rack until completely 
cool. Invert the pans to remove the cakes. 
Remove the parchment paper. 
7. Place 1 layer on a cake round (or directly onto a 
cake stand or serving platter). Using an offset spatula, 
spread the pastry cream on top to within 1/2 inch 
of the edges. Place the other layer on top. 
8. Pour the ganache on top; carefully spread to 
about 1/4 inch from the edges. The ganache will overflow 
slightly and gently brim the edges. Arrange 
the marrons glaces on top of the cake, spaced 
evenly. Set the cake in a cool place to allow the 
ganache to firm. 
CAKES 515 


chocolate ganache 


MAKES ENOUGH FOR ONE 9-INCH LAYER CAKE 

5 ounces semisweet chocolate, 
finely chopped 


2/3 cup heavy cream 

Place the chocolate in a small bowl. Bring the 
cream to a boil in a small saucepan over medium-
high heat. Pour the boiling cream over the chocolate. 
Cover with plastic wrap for several minutes. 
Remove the wrap, and stir until the chocolate is 
completely smooth and melted. Set the ganache in 
a cool place; let stand until thickened to the consistency 
of thick cake batter, 10 to 15 minutes. 

two-colored squash loaf cake 

MAKES ONE 5 X 9-INCH LOAF 

Purchase high-quality pistachios, and pick 
through the nuts for the greenest ones. After 
roasting, rub the nuts between your palms to 
eliminate as much of the brown skin as possible. 

10 tablespoons (11/4 sticks) unsalted 
butter, room temperature, plus more 
for the loaf pan 


2 cups all-purpose flour, plus more 
for the pan 


4 each medium yellow and green zucchini 
(about 11/2 pounds) 


1 cup shelled, unsalted pistachio nuts, 
roughly chopped 


1 teaspoon salt 
11/2 teaspoons baking powder 

11/4 cups sugar 
4 large eggs 

1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 
2 teaspoons fennel seeds 


1. Preheat the oven to 425 degrees F. Generously butter a 
5 x 9-inch loaf pan. Sprinkle the pan with flour, tap 
out excess flour, then set the pan side. Using a box 
grater, coarsely grate the squash. Place the grated 
squash in a piece of cheesecloth, and squeeze out 
as much liquid as possible; set the squash aside. 
2. Place the pistachios on a baking pan, and toast 
in the oven for 5 minutes. Remove, and set aside 
to cool. In a medium bowl, sift together the flour, 
salt, and baking powder; set aside. 

3. In an electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment, 
combine the butter and sugar; beat on 
medium-high speed until light and fluffy. Add the 
eggs, 1 at a time, and mix until combined. Beat in 
the vanilla extract. Add the flour mixture, and beat 
until just combined. 
4. Remove the bowl from the mixer stand; fold in 
the squash, pistachios, and fennel seeds. Spoon the 
batter into the prepared loaf pan; bake 10 minutes. 
5. Reduce the oven temperature to 350 degrees F, and bake 
the loaf cake until golden brown and a wooden 
skewer, inserted into the center of the loaf, comes 
out clean, about 1 hour. Remove the cake from the 
oven, and transfer to a wire rack until cool. 
apple pie upside-down cake 

MAKES ONE 1  CAKE 

11/4 cups (21/2 sticks) unsalted butter, 
softened, plus more for pan 

11/2 cups packed light-brown sugar 
3 tablespoons Calvados apple brandy 

Salt 
3 whole cinnamon sticks 


6 medium Braeburn or McIntosh apples 
(about 21/2 pounds), peeled, cored, and 
cut into  -thick rings 


21/4 cups all-purpose flour 
1/2 teaspoon baking soda 

1/2 teaspoon baking powder 

3/4 teaspoon ground cinnamon 
11/2 cups granulated sugar 
3 large eggs 

11/2 teaspoons pure vanilla extract 
1/2 cup sour cream 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees  F. Butter a 12 x   
round pizza pan. Line bottom with parchment 
paper, and butter parchment; set aside. Put 1/2 cup 
butter, the brown sugar, brandy, and a pinch of salt 
into the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the 
paddle attachment; mix on medium-high speed 
until pale and fluffy, 2 to 3 minutes. 
516 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


2. Spread mixture into prepared pan. Place cinnamon 
sticks on top. Layer with apple rings. Use your 
hands to press apples gently into mixture; set aside. 
Sift flour, baking soda, baking powder, 3/4 teaspoon 
salt, and the ground cinnamon into a medium bowl; 
set aside. 
3. Put remaining 3/4 cup butter and the granulated 
sugar into the clean bowl of an electric mixer fitted 
with the clean paddle attachment; mix on medium-
high speed until pale and fluffy. Mix in eggs, one 
at a time, and vanilla. Reduce speed to low. Add 
flour mixture in 2 batches, alternating with the sour 
cream. Spread batter evenly over apples. 
4. Bake until cake is golden brown and a cake tester 
inserted into center comes out clean, about 45 minutes. 
Let cool on a wire rack 15 minutes. Invert onto 
a serving plate. The cake can be stored at room temperature, 
covered, up to 1 day. 
"pumpkin pie" cheesecake 

MAKES ONE 10-INCH CAKE 

for the filling 

1 small butternut squash (about 13/4 pounds) 

Unsalted butter, for parchment and pan 

3/4 teaspoon ground cinnamon 
1/8 teaspoon ground allspice 
1/8 teaspoon freshly grated nutmeg 


1/2 teaspoon ground ginger 
21/2 pounds cream cheese, room temperature 

13/4 cups sugar 
1/2 cup all-purpose flour 

3/4 cup sour cream 
11/4 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 
1/4 teaspoon salt 
5 large eggs 

6 tablespoons unsalted butter, softened 

1/3 cup sugar 
1 large egg yolk 


1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 

1 cup all-purpose flour, plus more for 
work surface 
Pinch of salt 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Make the filling: Cut 
squash in half lengthwise; remove seeds, and reserve 
for another use. Place squash, cut sides down, 
on a baking sheet lined with buttered parchment 
paper. Bake until tender, about 45 minutes. Transfer 
sheet to a wire rack; let cool. 
2. Make the crust: Put butter and sugar into the 
bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment; 
mix on medium speed until pale and 
fluffy. Mix in egg yolk and vanilla. Reduce speed to 
low. Add flour and salt; mix until dough comes together. 
Shape into a disk; wrap in plastic. Refrigerate 
until firm, at least 30 minutes and up to 1 day. 
3. On a lightly floured surface, roll dough into a 10inch 
circle, a scant 1/4 inch thick. Fit into the bottom 
of a 10-inch springform pan. Freeze 15 minutes. 
Bake until crust is firm and pale golden, 12 to 15 
minutes. Transfer to a wire rack; let cool completely. 
Reduce oven temperature to 325 degrees F. 
4. Scoop squash flesh into a food processor; process 
until pureed. Transfer 1 cup puree to a medium bowl 
(reserve remainder for another use). Stir in cinnamon, 
allspice, nutmeg, and ginger. 
5. Wrap exterior of a springform pan (including 
base) in 2 layers of foil. Butter sides of pan; set aside. 
Put cream cheese into the clean bowl of an electric 
mixer fitted with the clean paddle attachment; 
mix on medium speed until fluffy. Gradually add 
sugar and flour, mixing until smooth. Mix in sour 
cream, vanilla, and salt. Mix in eggs, one at a time, 
until just combined; do not overmix. 
6. Stir 2 cups cream cheese mixture into squash 
mixture; set aside. Pour remaining cream cheese 
mixture into prepared pan on top of the crust. Drop 
dollops of squash-cream cheese mixture on top. 
Gently swirl with a butter knife. 
7. Set pan in a large, shallow roasting pan. Transfer 
to the oven. Carefully pour enough boiling water 
into the roasting pan to come halfway up sides of 
cheesecake. Bake until cake is set but still slightly 
wobbly in center, 50 to 60 minutes. Turn off oven; 
let stand in oven with door slightly ajar 1 hour. Let 
cool completely on a wire rack. Refrigerate at least 
6 hours or overnight. To serve, run a knife around 
sides of cake; and unmold. 
CAKES 517 


berry pound cakes 

MAKES TWO 41/X 8  LOAVES 

1 cup (2 sticks) unsalted butter, 
softened, plus more for pans 


23/4 cups all-purpose flour 
1/2 cup cake flour (not self-rising) 

1 tablespoon baking powder 

1 teaspoon salt 

21/4 cups granulated sugar 

11/2 teaspoons pure vanilla extract 
3 large eggs, plus 1 large egg white 
1 cup whole milk 

11/2 cups heavy cream 
1 tablespoon confectioners' sugar 

1 cup fresh blueberries (about 4 ounces) 
1 cup fresh raspberries (about 4 ounces) 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Butter two 41/2 x 81/2inch 
loaf pans. Line with parchment paper, allowing 
a   overhang on long sides. Butter the 
parchment; set aside. Whisk together flours, baking 
powder, and salt in a medium bowl; set aside. 
2. Put butter, granulated sugar, and vanilla into the 
bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment; 
mix on medium speed until pale and 
fluffy, 3 to 4 minutes. Mix in eggs, one at a time. Reduce 
speed to low. Add flour mixture in 2 batches, 
alternating with the milk. 
3. Divide batter between prepared pans. Bake until 
dark golden and a cake tester inserted into centers 
comes out clean, 55 to 60 minutes. Let cool on 
a wire rack 15 minutes. Lift cakes out; let cool completely 
on rack. Trim tops of cakes to make level. 
The cakes can be stored at room temperature, covered, 
up to 1 day. 
4. Put cream and confectioners' sugar into the clean 
bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the whisk attachment; 
beat on medium-high speed until soft 
peaks form. Transfer whipped cream to a pastry bag 
fitted with a leaf tip (such as Ateco #113). Pipe a ruffled 
pattern on tops of cakes. Pile blueberries in center 
of 1 cake, and raspberries in center of the other. 
cherry blossom cake 

MAKES ONE 9-INCH LAYER CAKE 

for the cake 

12 tablespoons (11/2 sticks) unsalted butter, 
softened, plus more for pans 


21/4 cups all-purpose flour, plus more 
for dusting 

21/4 teaspoons baking powder 

1/4 teaspoon salt 
11/2 cups sugar 

3 large eggs 
1/2 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 


3/4 cup whole milk 
for the buttercream frosting 

3 cups packed light-brown sugar 

12 large egg whites 
2 pounds (8 sticks) unsalted butter, softened 
and cut into tablespoon-size pieces 
2 teaspoons pure vanilla extract 


for decorating 

Gel-paste food coloring in assorted hues 

Pastry tips (Ateco #2 round tip, #102 
petal tip, #3 round tip, #349 leaf tip) 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Cut a 9-inch round of 
parchment or waxed paper to line the bottom of a 
9-inch (  deep) round cake pan. Butter and line 
pan. Butter lining, then flour pan, tapping out excess. 
2. Make the cake: Whisk together flour, baking powder, 
and salt in a medium bowl; set aside. Put butter 
and sugar in the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with 
the paddle attachment; cream on medium-high 
speed until pale, 2 to 3 minutes. On medium speed, 
add eggs one at a time, mixing well after each addition. 
Add vanilla, and mix, scraping down sides of 
bowl. On low speed, add the flour mixture in 3 
batches, alternating with two batches of milk. Stir 
batter with a rubber spatula until evenly blended. 
3. Pour batter into prepared pan, and smooth top with 
a small offset spatula. Tap pan on work surface several 
times to release air pockets. 
4. Bake until a cake tester inserted into center comes 
out clean, 45 to 50 minutes. Let cake cool in pan on 
a wire rack, 20 minutes. Run a knife around edge of 
518 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


cake to loosen. Invert cake to remove from pan, and 
peel off parchment. Re-invert, and let cool completely 
on rack. Wrap in plastic wrap, and refrigerate until 
ready to decorate. 

5. Make the buttercream frosting: Whisk sugar and 
egg whites in a large heatproof bowl set over a pan 
of simmering water until sugar is dissolved and mixture 
registers 140 degrees F on an instant-read thermometer, 
2 to 3 minutes. 
6. Fit an electric mixer with the whisk attachment, 
and beat the egg white mixture on high speed until 
it holds stiff (but not dry) peaks and mixture is fluffy 
and cooled, about 10 minutes. 
7. Reduce speed to medium-low, and add butter several 
tablespoons at a time, beating well after each addition 
(meringue will deflate slightly as butter is 
added). Add vanilla; beat until frosting comes together, 
3 to 5 minutes. Beat on lowest speed until 
air bubbles diminish, about 2 minutes. Stir with a 
rubber spatula until frosting is smooth. 
8. Assemble the cake: Trim the top of the cake with 
a long serrated knife to make the surface level. Using 
a ruler as a guide, insert toothpicks or wooden skewers 
into the sides of the cake at   intervals to 
mark 2 equal layers. Rest the serrated knife on the 
toothpicks, and halve the cake horizontally using a 
sawing motion. Carefully slide the top cake layer onto 
a cardboard round, and set it aside. 
9. With a small offset spatula, spread top of bottom 
cake layer with 1 1/4 cups frosting; carefully slide the 
second cake layer back on top of the first cake layer. 
10. Gently brush away loose crumbs from top and 
sides of cake with a pastry brush. With the offset spatula, 
spread about 1 1/2 cups frosting over top and sides 
of cake to form a crumb coat. Refrigerate cake until 
frosting is firm, about 15 minutes. 
11. With a large offset spatula, spread about 2 more 
cups frosting over top and sides to form a second 
coat. Smooth top and remove excess frosting with 
the large offset spatula. Smooth sides with a bench 
scraper. Return cake to refrigerator, and chill until 
second coat is firm, about 15 minutes. 
12. Tint 11/2 cups frosting pale pink (for flowers and 
buds). Tint 1/2 cup frosting a darker pink (for more 
flowers and buds). Tint 1/2 cup chocolate brown (for 
branches), and 1/2 cup green (for leaves). Tint 1/4 cup 
yellow (for dots). Set aside. 
13. Using a toothpick or wooden skewer, mark a pattern 
on the frosting to serve as a guideline for piping 
branches. 
14. Decorate cake: Follow instructions below. 
15. Refrigerate cake; let stand at room temperature 
20 minutes before serving. Slice into wedges: To 
avoid crumbs on surface, make each cut with one 
downward motion, pulling knife back toward you (not 
upward) and wiping knife clean after each cut. 
 

CAKES 519 


teatime coconut layer cake 

SERVES 10 TO 12 

Vegetable oil cooking spray 

31/3 cups sifted cake flour (not self-rising) 
21/4 cups superfine sugar 

3/4 teaspoon baking soda 
Salt 
3/4 cup vegetable oil 
11 large eggs, separated, plus 3 egg whites 
1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 

3/4 cup granulated sugar 
1/4 cup cream of coconut 

Coconut Meringue Buttercream 
(recipe follows) 


1 cup sweetened flaked coconut 

2/3 cup unsweetened coconut shavings, 
for garnish 


1. Preheat the oven to 325 degrees F. Coat three 9 x   
round cake pans with cooking spray; line with 
parchment paper. Set aside. 
2. Sift flour, 13/4 cups superfine sugar, the baking 
soda, and 1/2 teaspoon salt into the bowl of an electric 
mixer fitted with the paddle attachment. Whisk 
together 3/4 cup water, the vegetable oil, egg yolks, 
and vanilla in another bowl. Add yolk mixture to 
flour mixture; mix on medium-high speed until 
smooth, about 2 minutes. Transfer to a large bowl; 
set aside. 
3. Put egg whites and a pinch of salt into the clean 
bowl of the mixer fitted with the whisk attachment; 
beat on medium speed until foamy. Raise speed to 
medium-high; beat until soft peaks form. Gradually 
add remaining 1/2 cup superfine sugar; beat until 
stiff, glossy peaks form. 
4. Fold one-quarter of egg white mixture into batter 
with a rubber spatula. Fold in remaining egg 
white mixture in 2 batches. Divide batter evenly 
among prepared pans. Bake until cakes are golden 
brown and spring back when pressed, 30 to 35 minutes. 
Invert cakes onto wire racks to cool; remove 
parchment. 
5. Make coconut syrup: Bring 1 cup water, the granulated 
sugar, a pinch of salt, and the cream of coconut 
to a boil in a small saucepan, stirring 
occasionally. Boil 1 minute; remove from heat, and 
let stand. 
6. Trim cakes to make level. Place 1 cake on a serving 
plate, and brush with 1/3 cup coconut syrup. 
Spread with 1 cup buttercream, and sprinkle with 
1/3 cup sweetened coconut. Top with another cake. 
Brush with 1/3 cup syrup; spread with 1 cup butter-
cream, and sprinkle with 1/3 cup sweetened coconut. 
Top with final cake; brush with remaining 1/3 cup 
syrup. Refrigerate until firm. 
7. Spread 11/4 cups buttercream over top and sides 
of cake. Refrigerate until buttercream is firm, about 
30 minutes. 
8. Spread 11/2 cups buttercream over top and sides 
of cake. Refrigerate until buttercream is very firm, 
at least 1 hour. Fill a pastry bag fitted with a   
basketweave tip (such as Ateco #898) with butter-
cream. Holding bag perpendicular to cake, pipe 
sides in a back-and-forth motion, starting at the bottom. 
Refill bag as needed. Sprinkle the top with the 
remaining 1 cup sweetened coconut and the unsweetened 
coconut shavings. The cake can be 
refrigerated up to 2 days; let stand at room temperature 
20 minutes before serving. 
520 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


coconut meringue buttercream 

MAKES ABOUT 9 CUPS 

10 large egg whites 

21/4 cups sugar 
1/4 teaspoon salt 

4 cups (8 sticks) unsalted butter, softened 
1/2 cup cream of coconut 


1/2 teaspoon pure coconut extract 

1. Whisk egg whites, sugar, and salt in the heatproof 
bowl of an electric mixer set over a pan of simmering 
water until sugar has dissolved and mixture 
registers 160 degrees F, about 3 minutes. 
2. Attach bowl to mixer fitted with the whisk attachment. 
Beat on medium-high speed until cooled, 
about 10 minutes. Reduce speed to medium. Add 
butter; beat until pale and fluffy. Mix in cream of 
coconut and coconut extract. The buttercream can 
be refrigerated in an airtight container up to 3 days; 
beat before using. 
triple-chocolate mousse cakes 

MAKES 8 SMALL CAKES 

Vegetable oil cooking spray 

2/3 cup all-purpose flour 
1/3 cup unsweetened Dutch-process 
cocoa powder 
2/3 cup sugar 


3/4 teaspoon baking soda 
1/2 teaspoon baking powder 
1/4 teaspoon salt 
1 large egg, room temperature 


1/4 cup whole milk 

3 tablespoons vegetable oil 

1/2 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 
Chocolate Mousses (recipe follows) 


2 ounces solid semisweet chocolate 
Chocolate curls, for garnish 


1. Preheat oven to 350 degrees F. Place eight 6-ounce (31/2inch 
diameter) ramekins on a rimmed baking sheet, 
and coat with cooking spray; set aside. 
2. Stir flour, cocoa powder, sugar, baking soda, baking 
powder, and salt in the bowl of an electric mixer. 
Attach bowl to mixer fitted with the paddle attachment. 
Add egg, milk, oil, vanilla, and 1/4 cup water; 
mix on medium-low speed until smooth and combined, 
about 3 minutes. 
3. Divide batter evenly among prepared ramekins. 
Bake until a cake tester inserted into the centers 
comes out clean, about 20 minutes. Transfer to a 
wire rack; let cool completely. Run a knife around 
sides of cakes; unmold. The cakes can be refrigerated, 
wrapped in plastic, up to 1 day. 
4. Trim each cake to 1 inch high. Transfer to a baking 
sheet lined with parchment paper. Cut eight 
103/4 x 4-inch strips of parchment paper. Wrap a 
parchment collar around base of each cake, keeping 
bottom flush with baking sheet. Secure each 
collar with tape; set aside. 
5. Transfer bittersweet-chocolate mousse to a large 
pastry bag fitted with a large round tip (such as 
Ateco #808). Pipe a   layer of mousse into each 
parchment collar; refrigerate until set, about 20 
minutes. Repeat with milk chocolate mousse, piping 
on top of the bittersweet chocolate mousse. Refrigerate 
at least 4 hours, or overnight. 
6. Microwave semisweet chocolate until slightly 
warm but not melted, about 30 seconds. Scrape at 
a 45-degree angle with a vegetable peeler, forming 
curls. Before serving cakes, remove parchment 
collars, and garnish with chocolate curls. 
CAKES 521 


chocolate mousses 

MAKES ENOUGH FOR 8 SMALL CAKES 

This recipe makes two kinds of mousse: bittersweet 
chocolate and milk chocolate. 

31/3 cups heavy cream 

8 large egg yolks, room temperature 

1/2 cup sugar 

1/4 cup light corn syrup 

7 ounces bittersweet chocolate, melted 

2 teaspoons pure vanilla extract 

Salt 

7 ounces milk chocolate, melted 

1. Put 12/3 cups cream into the bowl of an electric 
mixer fitted with the whisk attachment; beat on 
medium-high speed until soft peaks form, about 31/2 
minutes. Transfer to a bowl; refrigerate 1 hour. 
2. Put 4 egg yolks into the clean bowl of the mixer 
fitted with the clean whisk attachment; beat on high 
speed until pale and frothy, 4 to 5 minutes. Meanwhile, 
bring 1/4 cup sugar, 2 tablespoons corn syrup, 
and 2 tablespoons water to a rolling boil in a small, 
heavy saucepan over high heat. Cook until clear, 
large bubbles form, about 1 minute. Reduce mixer 
speed to medium-low. Carefully pour hot syrup 
down side of bowl. Raise speed to medium-high. 
Mix until slightly thickened, about 5 minutes. Stir 
in bittersweet chocolate, 1 teaspoon vanilla, and a 
pinch of salt with a rubber spatula. 
3. Add one-third of bittersweet-chocolate mixture 
to whipped cream; whisk to combine. Add remaining 
mixture, whisking until completely combined. 
Press through a large-mesh sieve into a large bowl; 
discard any solids. Repeat entire recipe, substituting 
milk chocolate for the bittersweet. 
NOTE The egg yolks in this recipe are not fully 
cooked. It should not be prepared for pregnant 
women, babies, young children, the elderly, or anyone 
whose health is compromised. 

strawberry mousse cake 

SERVES 8 TO 10 

for the mousse 

1 pound strawberries, hulled and halved, 
plus 2 cups sliced strawberries 


2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 

8 ounces white chocolate, finely chopped 
11/4 teaspoons unflavored gelatin 

2 cups heavy cream 
2 tablespoons confectioners' sugar 


for the cake 

Vegetable oil cooking spray 

1 cup sifted cake flour, plus more for 
baking sheet 


5 large eggs plus 2 large egg yolks 

3/4 cup sugar 
Pinch of salt 
1 tablespoon finely grated lemon zest 
6 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted 


for the ganache 

2/3 cup heavy cream 

12 ounces white chocolate, finely chopped 
Pinch of salt 


2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 

Whole and halved strawberries, 
for garnish 


1. Make the mousse: Puree halved strawberries in 
a food processor. Pass through a very fine sieve into 
a bowl (you should have about 1 cup puree). Stir in 
1 tablespoon lemon juice; set aside. 
2. Melt the chocolate in a medium heatproof bowl 
set over a pan of simmering water, stirring until 
smooth; set aside. 
522 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


3. Put 1/4 cup cool water into a small bowl. Sprinkle 
gelatin over top; let stand until softened, about 5 
minutes. Stir 1/4 cup cream and the confectioners' 
sugar in a small saucepan; bring to a simmer over 
medium heat. Add gelatin mixture, and stir until 
gelatin has dissolved. Pour into bowl with the 
melted chocolate; stir until smooth. Whisk in 3/4 cup 
strawberry puree; reserve remaining 1/4 cup puree. 
4. Put remaining 13/4 cups cream into the bowl of an 
electric mixer fitted with the whisk attachment. Beat 
on medium-high speed until medium peaks form. 
Whisk one-third of the whipped cream into the 
chocolate mixture. Fold in the remaining whipped 
cream using a large rubber spatula. Refrigerate 1 
hour. Stir remaining 1 tablespoon lemon juice into 
the sliced berries. Fold berries into mousse; refrigerate 
1 hour. 
5. Preheat the oven to 425 degrees F. Make the cake: Coat 
a 12 x 18 x   rimmed baking sheet with cooking 
spray. Line bottom with parchment paper, and 
spray parchment. Dust with flour, and tap out excess. 
6. Put eggs, egg yolks, and sugar into the heatproof 
bowl of an electric mixer set over a pan of simmering 
water. Whisk constantly until the mixture 
is warm and the sugar has melted, about 2 minutes. 
Attach bowl to mixer fitted with whisk attachment. 
Beat on high speed until egg mixture is pale, thickened, 
and has cooled, about 6 minutes. 
7. Remove bowl from mixer; sift together flour and 
salt over the top of egg mixture, and sprinkle with 
lemon zest. Using a large rubber spatula, carefully 
fold the flour mixture into the egg mixture, cutting 
through center and lifting gently over sides. When 
the flour is almost incorporated, pour butter down 
side of bowl, and gently fold in to incorporate. 
8. Pour batter into prepared baking sheet; smooth 
top. Bake until center springs back when lightly 
touched, 7 to 12 minutes. Invert, and unmold cake 
onto a parchment-lined wire rack; peel parchment 
from cake, and let cool completely. 
9. Assemble the cake: Cut cake crosswise into 3 rectangles. 
Set 1 layer, top side down, on a wire rack set 
over a rimmed baking sheet. Brush with half of the 
remaining strawberry puree. Spread a  -thick 
layer of mousse (about 2 cups) over the top. Top with 
second cake layer, top side up. Brush with remaining 
strawberry puree; spread with a  -thick 
layer of mousse. Place third cake layer on top, top 
side up. Refrigerate at least 2 hours (preferably 
overnight). Trim sides of cake to be straight. 
10. Make the ganache: Bring cream just to a boil 
in a small saucepan over medium-high heat. Pour 
hot cream over the chocolate in a medium bowl; let 
stand 5 minutes. Stir until smooth. Stir in salt and 
lemon juice. Let stand until ganache is pourable 
and has cooled slightly. Pour ganache over top of 
cake, allowing it to drip down sides. Refrigerate assembled 
cake 1 hour before serving. Using 2 large 
spatulas, transfer cake to a serving platter. Garnish 
with strawberries. 
CAKES 523 


brown sugar angel food cake 
with candied citrus slices 

MAKES ONE 10-INCH CAKE 

11/4 cups sifted cake flour (not self-rising) 
11/2 cups packed light-brown sugar, sifted 
14 large egg whites, room temperature 

11/2 teaspoons cream of tartar 
Pinch of salt 

2 teaspoons finely grated lemon zest 

Candied Citrus Slices, for serving (recipe 
follows) 

16 ounces creme fraiche 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Stir together flour and 
3/4 cup brown sugar. Sift twice. 
2. Put egg whites into the bowl of an electric mixer 
fitted with the whisk attachment. Beat on medium 
speed until foamy. Add cream of tartar and salt. 
Raise speed to high, and beat until soft peaks form. 
Sprinkle half the remaining 3/4 cup brown sugar over 
egg white mixture, and beat until combined. Sprinkle 
the remaining brown sugar over egg white mixture, 
and beat until stiff, glossy peaks form. 
3. Transfer egg white mixture to a large bowl. Fold 
in flour mixture in 3 batches, folding in lemon zest 
with last batch. 
4. Spoon batter into an ungreased 10-inch tube pan 
(not nonstick) with a removable bottom. Run a knife 
through batter to eliminate air pockets. Bake until 
cake is golden and springs back when lightly 
touched, about 45 minutes. 
5. Invert pan onto its legs or over a narrow-neck 
bottle; let cool 1 hour. Reinvert, and run a knife 
around sides and tube to loosen; remove sides. Run 
a long knife along bottom of cake; remove from tube. 
6. Place cake on a serving platter. Cut a slit in rind of 
candied citrus slices; twist slices, and arrange around 
bottom of cake. Reserve 1 slice for hole in center. 
7. Put creme fraiche into a medium bowl. Whisk 
until lightened. Transfer a little more than 1/4 cup to 
a pastry bag fitted with a large rose tip (such as 
Ateco #123). Decoratively pipe creme fraiche 
around top edge of cake. Place 1 citrus slice over 
hole; pipe creme fraiche around it. Serve remaining 
creme fraiche on the side. 
candied citrus slices 

MAKES ENOUGH TO GARNISH ONE 

10-INCH CAKE 

3 cups sugar 

1 small red grapefruit, thinly sliced 
into rounds 


1 navel orange, thinly sliced into rounds 

1. Cut a round of parchment paper to fit just inside 
a medium pot; set aside. Bring sugar and 3 cups 
water to a simmer in pot, stirring until sugar has dissolved. 
When liquid is clear and bubbling, reduce 
heat to medium-low. Add citrus slices, arranging 
them in a slightly overlapping layer. Cover with the 
parchment paper round. Place a cake pan on top of 
parchment to keep slices submerged. Simmer (do 
not boil) until rinds are almost translucent, about 40 
minutes. Let cool completely in syrup. The candied 
citrus slices can be stored in syrup up to 1 week. 
2. Line a baking sheet with parchment paper; set a 
wire rack over sheet. Transfer candied citrus to rack. 
Let stand until dry and slightly firm, about 8 hours. 
524 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


pastries 



cream puffs 

MAKES 90 

The lined baking sheets can be marked with 
flourdipped cookie cutters to help guide you in 
piping the dough into uniform shapes. 

4 cups Pastry Cream (page 655) 

Pate a Choux (page 653) 

1 egg mixed with 1 tablespoon water, 
for egg wash 
Crystal sanding sugar (optional) 


Chopped nuts (optional) 
Oil, for plastic wrap 


3/4 cup heavy cream 
Confectioners' sugar, for garnish 
1. Preheat the oven to 425 degrees F, with a rack in the center. 
Line 2 unrimmed baking sheets with parchment 
paper or Silpats (nonstick French baking mats). 
2. Make the pastry cream, and refrigerate. Make the 
pate a choux batter. Fill a pastry bag fitted with a 
coupler or   (Ateco #806) tip, and pipe   
rounds onto the baking sheets at   intervals. 
Using your fingers, rub egg wash over the entire 
top, and flatten the tips, being careful not to let the 
egg wash drip onto the surrounding baking sheet 
(it will inhibit rising). Sprinkle with crystal sanding 
sugar or chopped nuts, if desired. 
3. Cover 1 sheet with lightly oiled plastic wrap, and 
place in the refrigerator. Transfer the other to the 
oven. Bake 10 minutes; reduce the oven heat to 
350 degrees F. Bake 15 to 20 minutes, or until the puffs are 
golden brown. Transfer to a wire rack to let cool 
slightly. Raise the heat back to 425 degrees F, and repeat 
the process for the remaining batch. 
4. Whip the heavy cream to stiff peaks in a small 
bowl. Stir the pastry cream to soften. Add the 
whipped cream to the pastry cream in 2 batches; 
stir to combine after each. Fill a pastry bag fitted 
with a coupler and filling tip (Ateco #230). Insert 
the tip into the underside of each cream puff, and 
fill. Cool completely before dusting with confectioners' 
sugar. Serve, or store up to 2 hours in an airtight 
container in the refrigerator. 
eclairs 

MAKES 30 

You can make coffee icing by whisking together 
2 cups sifted confectioners' sugar, 1 tablespoon 
melted butter, and 3 tablespoons brewed coffee. 
Make the icing just before serving. 

4 cups Pastry Cream (page 655) 

Pate a Choux (page 653) 

Oil, for plastic wrap 

for chocolate glaze 

1/4 cup water 

1/4 cup light corn syrup 

1/2 cup sugar 

41/2 ounces semisweet chocolate, 
finely chopped 

1. Preheat the oven to 425 degrees F, with a rack in the center. 
Line 2 unrimmed baking sheets with parchment 
paper or Silpats (French nonstick baking mats). 
2. Make the pastry cream; refrigerate. Make the pate 
a choux batter. Fill a pastry bag fitted with a   
(Ateco #806) tip; pipe out oblong shapes, about 
31/2 inches long and 1 inch wide, onto the baking 
sheets at   intervals. Gently run a fork dipped 
in water along the top, making straight lines to ensure 
even rising. 
3. Cover 1 sheet with lightly oiled plastic wrap, and 
place in the refrigerator. Transfer the other to the 
oven. Bake 10 minutes; reduce the oven heat to 
350 degrees F. Bake 25 to 30 minutes, or until golden brown. 
Turn off the oven; prop the door open slightly to let 
steam escape. Allow the eclairs to dry in the oven 
about 15 minutes, or until the center is damp but 
no wet dough remains (test by cutting into the center 
of one). Transfer to a wire rack to cool slightly. 
Raise the heat back to 425 degrees F, and repeat the process 
for the remaining batch. If serving immediately, fill 
while still warm so the eclairs can take more cream. 
If filling at a later time, insert a skewer into one end 
of each, and move it around to expand the opening 
for cream; set aside. 
4. In a medium bowl, stir the pastry cream to soften. 
Fill a pastry bag fitted with a coupler and filling tip 
526 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


(Ateco #230) with pastry cream. Insert the tip into 
one end of each eclair; fill. Serve, or glaze as follows. 

5. To make the glaze, combine the water, corn syrup, 
and sugar in a small saucepan. Stir over medium-
high heat until the sugar is dissolved. Bring the mixture 
to a boil, washing the sides of the pan with a 
wet pastry brush to prevent crystals from forming. 
Once at a boil, remove from heat; add the chocolate. 
Let stand 2 minutes; stir gently until smooth. 
Transfer the glaze to a shallow bowl. Dip the top 
of each eclair into the glaze; let excess drip off before 
turning over. Transfer to a wire rack to allow 
glaze to set. Serve, or store in an airtight container 
in the refrigerator up to 1 day. 
chocolate turnovers 

MAKES 9 

These turnovers are a variation on the classic 
pain au chocolat. For maximum flavor, look for 
the highest-quality chocolate possible, such as 
Callebaut, Valrhona, or Scharffen Berger. 

All-purpose flour, for the work surface 

1 pound 6 ounces Puff Pastry dough 

(page 653) 

1 large egg yolk 

1 tablespoon heavy cream 

21/4 ounces semisweet chocolate, 
cut into 9 equal pieces 

1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. On a lightly floured 
work surface, roll out the pastry dough into a 12inch 
square, about x inch thick, with a rolling pin. 
Brush off excess flour. Using a pastry wheel or sharp 
knife, trim the edges and cut the square into nine 
3  squares. Place the squares on an ungreased 
baking sheet. 
2. In a small bowl, whisk together the egg yolk and 
cream for the egg wash. Using a pastry brush, moisten 
2 adjacent edges of each square with egg wash. 
Place a piece of chocolate just below the center of 
each square; fold down the unwashed edges over 
the chocolate to form a triangle, completely enclosing 
the chocolate. Using your fingers, gently 
but firmly press the pastry edges together to seal. 
Cover with plastic wrap; refrigerate 30 minutes. 
3. Remove the turnovers from the refrigerator, and 
brush the tops liberally with the remaining egg 
wash. Place the pan in the oven, and bake until the 
turnovers are puffed and golden brown all over, 25 
to 30 minutes. Remove from the oven; using a spatula, 
immediately transfer the turnovers to a wire 
rack to cool completely before serving. 
palmiers 

MAKES ABOUT 30 

Once the palmiers are in the oven, watch them 
closely, as they may go from a perfect dark 
golden brown to burned in seconds. 

3/4 cup sugar 
14 ounces Puff Pastry dough (page 653) 
1. Sprinkle half the sugar on a clean work surface. 
Place the dough on top, and sprinkle evenly with 
the remaining sugar. 
2. Using a rolling pin, gently roll out the dough into 
a 91/2 x 1  rectangle 1/8 inch thick, being careful 
not to press too hard around the edges. Continually 
coat both sides with sugar. 
3. Place the dough so one of the long sides is closest 
to you. Using your fingers, roll the dough lengthwise 
into a long cylinder, as tightly as possible 
without stretching it, as you would a roll of wrapping 
paper, stopping when you reach the middle. 
Repeat the same rolling procedure with the other 
long side until you have 2 tight cylinders that meet 
in the middle. Wrap tightly in plastic wrap; place in 
the refrigerator to chill at least 1 hour. 
4. Unwrap the dough; using a sharp knife, cut the 
dough crosswise into  -thick slices. Place the 
palmiers on an ungreased baking sheet, and firmly 
flatten with the palm of your hand. Cover with plastic 
wrap; place in the refrigerator 1 hour. 
5. Preheat the oven to 425 degrees F. Place the palmiers in 
the oven, and bake 5 minutes. Reduce the oven temperature 
to 400 degrees F; continue baking until the pastry 
is golden brown and well caramelized, about 
10 minutes. Remove from the oven; using a thin 
spatula, immediately transfer the palmiers to a wire 
rack to cool completely. Serve shiny side up. 
PASTRIES 527 


classic napoleon 

SERVES 6 

Don't be discouraged if your napoleon doesn't 
cut neatly into serving pieces; even if it's slightly 
flattened, each bite will still be delicious. To pipe 
the white chocolate, you'll need a piping cone 
made from parchment paper. 

All-purpose flour, for the work surface 

13/4 pounds Puff Pastry dough (page 653) or 
Quick Puff Pastry (page 654) 

1/3 cup heavy cream 

21/2 ounces dark semisweet chocolate, 
coarsely chopped (about 1/3 cup) 

1/2 teaspoon corn syrup 

1/4 ounce white chocolate, chopped 

(about 1 tablespoon) 

4 cups Pastry Cream (page 655) 

1. Lightly flour a clean work surface. Using a rolling 
pin, gently roll out the dough into a 16 x 18-inch 
rectangle about 1/8 inch thick, being careful not to 
press too hard around the edges. Using a pastry 
wheel or sharp knife, cut the rectangle crosswise 
into thirds (6 x 16 inches). Transfer to a baking 
sheet; pierce the dough all over with a fork. Cover 
with plastic wrap; place in the refrigerator 1 hour. 
2. Preheat the oven to 425 degrees F. Transfer the uncovered 
pastry strips to the oven; bake until they are 
puffed and golden all over, about 14 minutes. Set a 
baking sheet directly on the pastry strips, and continue 
baking until the pastry is cooked through and 
well browned, about 6 minutes. Remove the top baking 
sheet; bake 4 minutes more. Transfer to a wire 
rack to cool completely. Using a serrated knife, trim 
each strip to 41/4 x 12 inches. 
3. Make the glaze: In a small saucepan, bring the 
heavy cream just to a boil. Place the dark chocolate 
in a bowl, and pour hot cream over the chocolate; 
whisk until the chocolate is melted and the mixture 
is combined. Whisk in the corn syrup. Strain 
through a fine mesh sieve into a clean bowl. 
4. Place the white chocolate in a medium heatproof 
bowl set over a pan of simmering water. Whisk until 
the chocolate is melted; let cool. 
5. Using an offset spatula, spread the dark chocolate 
glaze over 19 side of the flattest puff pastry strip, 
making sure to coat the entire surface. Place the 
white chocolate in a piping cone; pipe thin lines 3/4 
inch apart across the width of the chocolate-coated 
strip. To create the distinctive flourish, gently drag 
the tip of a paring knife or a skewer lengthwise 
through both coatings, in lines perpendicular to the 
white chocolate lines. Begin at one of the short ends, 
and make each line 3/4 inch apart. Alternate the direction 
each time. 
6. Place 1 of the unglazed puff pastry strips on a 
serving tray. Spread half the pastry cream over the 
top, leaving a   border all around. Top with 
the remaining unglazed pastry strip; press down 
gently, and repeat with the remaining pastry cream. 
Top with a glazed pastry strip. Transfer to the refrigerator, 
and chill 30 minutes, uncovered. Using 
a long serrated knife, cut into 6 pieces, and serve. 
apple napoleons 

SERVES 4 

1/2 teaspoon ground cinnamon 

6 tablespoons sugar 

1 sheet from 1 box (171/4 ounces) frozen 
puff pastry, thawed 
All-purpose flour, for work surface 


2 tablespoons unsalted butter 

4 small Granny Smith apples, peeled, cored, 
and cut lengthwise into  -thick 
wedges 

2 cups sweetened whipped cream 

1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. In a small bowl, combine 
the cinnamon and sugar. Place the pastry on 
a lightly floured work surface. Sprinkle evenly with 
2 tablespoons of the cinnamon mixture. Carefully 
roll out the dough to 1/8 inch thick. Cut out eight 
  squares, and place on a parchment-lined baking 
sheet. Cover with more parchment and another 
baking sheet. Chill in freezer until firm, about 
15 minutes. 
2. Bake pastry in oven until crisp and lightly 
browned, about 30 minutes. Remove top parchment 
and baking sheet. Transfer, with bottom parchment, 
to a wire rack, and let cool. 
528 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


3. Meanwhile, in a medium saucepan, melt the butter 
over medium-high heat until foam subsides. 
Add the apples; cook, stirring occasionally, until 
golden brown, about 7 minutes. Add the remaining 
cinnamon mixture. Cook until the apples are tender 
but not falling apart. Let cool completely. 
4. To assemble, top the pastry with whipped cream 
then apples; repeat with another layer of each. Serve 
immediately. 
praline napoleons 
with almond cream filling 


MAKES 6 

You can make puff pastry from scratch by following 
the recipes on page 653 or 654. 

All-purpose flour, for work surface 
1 sheet from 1 box (171/4 ounces) frozen 
puff pastry, thawed 
1 large egg, lightly beaten 


2 cups sugar 
Pinch of salt 


11/2 cups sliced almonds, toasted and 
finely chopped (about 7 ounces) 

Vegetable oil, for spatula 

Almond Cream Filling (recipe follows) 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Place pastry on a lightly 
floured work surface. Roll out to 1/8 inch thick. Cut 
out twelve 41/2 x 2  rectangles; transfer to a 
parchment-lined baking sheet, and prick with a fork. 
Brush with egg, and cover with parchment. Top with 
a baking sheet. Freeze until firm, about 15 minutes. 
2. With top sheet still in place, bake until pastry is 
crisp and golden, 30 to 32 minutes. Remove top 
sheet and parchment. Let pastry cool completely 
on bottom parchment on a wire rack. 
3. Meanwhile, line a rimmed baking sheet with a 
nonstick baking mat. Stir together sugar, salt, and 
1/2 cup water in a medium saucepan over medium-
high heat. Cook, without stirring, until sugar begins 
to melt and turn light amber, about 3 minutes. Wash 
down sides of pan with a wet pastry brush as 
needed to prevent crystals from forming. Continue 
to cook, stirring occasionally, until mixture turns 
dark amber, about 8 minutes. 
4. Remove from heat; stir in almonds. Pour mixture 
onto prepared sheet. Using an oiled offset spatula, 
spread to 1/8 inch thick. Let cool completely. Transfer 
half of the praline to a plastic bag; using a rolling 
pin, gently crush into very small pieces; set aside. 
Break remaining praline into large pieces. 
5. Transfer the almond cream filling to a pastry bag 
fitted with a petal tip (such as Wilton #127). Pipe 
filling onto 6 pastry rectangles; sprinkle each with 
crushed praline. Layer with another pastry rectangle 
and filling. Top each with a piece of praline. 
almond cream filling 

MAKES ENOUGH FOR 6 NAPOLEONS 

21/2 cups half-and-half 

2 tablespoons almond paste 

1 cup sugar 

1/4 teaspoon salt 
1/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons cornstarch 


4 large egg yolks 
1/8 teaspoon almond extract 


2 tablespoons unsalted butter, 
softened, cut into small pieces 


1 cup heavy cream 

1. Bring 2 cups half-and-half, the almond paste, 
sugar, salt, and cornstarch to a simmer in a saucepan 
over medium heat. 
2. Prepare an ice-water bath; set aside. Whisk egg 
yolks, almond extract, and remaining 1/2 cup halfand-
half in a medium bowl; add one-third of the hot 
half-and-half mixture in a slow, steady stream, 
whisking constantly. Pour into saucepan. 
3. Bring to a boil over medium-high heat, whisking 
constantly. Cook, whisking, until mixture coats the 
back of a spoon, 3 to 4 minutes. Pass through a fine 
sieve into a bowl set in ice-water bath. Stir in butter, 
several pieces at a time. Let cool completely, 
stirring occasionally. 
4. Put cream into the bowl of an electric mixer fitted 
with the whisk attachment. Beat on medium-high 
speed just until stiff peaks form. Fold into custard. 
PASTRIES 529 


cornmeal crepes with 
fresh buttermilk cheese and 
blackberries 


SERVES 6 

for the cheese 

6 cups low-fat buttermilk 
41/2 teaspoons confectioners' sugar 

for the crepes 

1/4 cup all-purpose flour 

2 tablespoons yellow cornmeal 
1/4 teaspoon baking soda 


Pinch of salt and freshly grated nutmeg 
1 large egg plus 1 large egg white 


1/4 cup skim milk 
1/4 cup low-fat buttermilk 


11/2 teaspoons honey 
1/2 teaspoon canola oil 

Vegetable oil cooking spray 
31/2 cups blackberries 

1/4 cup creme de cassis 
1 teaspoon confectioners' sugar 


1. Make the cheese: Line a large fine sieve with 3 
layers of cheesecloth, and set over a large bowl. 
Heat buttermilk in a medium saucepan over 
medium-low heat, without stirring, until clear liquid 
separates from milk at edges or a candy thermometer 
clipped to the edge of the pan registers 
95 degrees F. Reduce heat to low; cook until thermometer 
registers 100 degrees F. Remove from heat; let stand 3 minutes. 
Pour into sieve; cover bowl loosely with plastic 
wrap. Refrigerate until thick and creamy, about 
3 hours (up to overnight). Before serving, stir in confectioners' 
sugar. 
2. Make the crepes: Whisk flour, cornmeal, baking 
soda, salt, and nutmeg in a bowl. Whisk egg, egg 
white, milk, buttermilk, honey, and oil in another 
bowl; gradually add to flour mixture, whisking until 
smooth. Transfer to an airtight container; refrigerate 
30 minutes. 
3. Coat an 8-inch crepe pan with cooking spray; heat 
over medium heat. Remove from heat; pour in 21/2 
tablespoons batter, swirling to coat. Reduce heat to 
medium-low. Cook, flipping once, until edges are 
golden and center is dry, 45 to 60 seconds per side. 
Repeat with remaining batter. 
4. Toss together berries and cassis. Let stand 15 
minutes, tossing often. To serve, divide crepes 
among plates. Spread each with 1/4 cup cheese. 
Sprinkle with berries; drizzle with juice from bowl. 
Dust with sugar. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 231 CALORIES, 4 G FAT, 

46 MG CHOLESTEROL, 35 G CARBOHYDRATE, 372 MG 

SODIUM, 12 G PROTEIN, 5 G FIBER 

apple strudel 

SERVES 4 

1 cup dried bread crumbs 

3/4 cup grated peeled red apple 
(1 to 2 apples) 
1/2 cup golden raisins 

1/4 cup pitted prunes, coarsely chopped 
1/4 cup honey 


2 tablespoons Armagnac or other 
good-quality brandy 


1 teaspoon ground cinnamon, plus 
more for sprinkling 


1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 

5 sheets phyllo dough (at least 11 x 14 
inches), thawed if frozen 


1/2 cup (1 stick) unsalted butter, melted 

Confectioners' sugar and whipped 

cream, for serving 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees  F with rack in upper 
third. Gently stir together bread crumbs, apple, 
raisins, prunes, honey, brandy, cinnamon, and salt 
in a medium bowl. Set filling aside. 
2. Brush a sheet of phyllo with butter. Top with 2 
sheets, and brush with butter; repeat. Spread with 
filling. Starting at a short end, roll to enclose filling. 
Transfer, seam side down, to a baking sheet lined 
with parchment paper. 
3. Bake until golden brown, about 35 minutes. Transfer 
to a wire rack; cool 15 minutes. Sprinkle with cinnamon 
and sugar; serve with whipped cream. 
530 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


cookies 


AND 

candy 



hermit bars with brown 
sugar icing and candied ginger 

MAKES ABOUT 36 TWO-INCH SQUARES 

These spice-laden cookies originated in colonial 
New England; the candied ginger is our own addition. 
As the name implies, the bars are best 
after being hidden away for a day or two, so the 
flavors have a chance to deepen. 

1/2 cup (1 stick) unsalted butter, plus 
more for the pan, room temperature 


13/4 cups all-purpose flour 

3/4 teaspoon baking powder 
3/4 teaspoon baking soda 
1 tablespoon ground ginger 

1 teaspoon ground cinnamon 

1/2 teaspoon ground nutmeg 

Pinch of ground cloves 

1/4 teaspoon salt 

1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 
11/4 cups packed dark-brown sugar 

1 large whole egg 

1 large egg yolk 

1/4 cup molasses 

1 cup (about 5 ounces) chopped 
candied ginger, cut into   pieces 


3/4 cup raisins 
Brown Sugar Icing (recipe follows) 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Butter a 10 x 1  
baking pan, and line the bottom with parchment 
paper. Butter the parchment, and set the pan aside. 
Combine the flour, baking powder, baking soda, 
ginger, cinnamon, nutmeg, cloves, salt, and pepper 
in a medium bowl; set aside. 
2. In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the 
paddle attachment, cream the butter on medium 
speed until smooth. Add the sugar; beat until light 
and fluffy. Beat in the egg, yolk, and molasses. 
3. Add the flour mixture; beat on low speed until 
combined. Add 1/2 cup candied ginger and the 
raisins; beat until combined. 
4. Spread the dough into the prepared pan in an 
even layer, and bake until firm to the touch, 18 to 22 
minutes, rotating the pan halfway through. Remove 
from the oven; let cool completely in the pan before 
icing. 
5. Drizzle with icing, and then sprinkle with the remaining 
1/2 cup candied ginger. Let stand until icing 
has set, about 15 minutes. Serve cut into squares. 
brown sugar icing 

MAKES 3/4 CUP 

1/4 cup packed light brown sugar 

2 tablespoons milk, plus more as needed 

2 tablespoons unsalted butter 

1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 

1 cup sifted confectioners' sugar, plus more 
as needed 

Combine the brown sugar, milk, and butter in a 
medium saucepan. Stir over medium heat until the 
butter has melted and the sugar has dissolved. Remove 
from heat; whisk in the vanilla and confectioners' 
sugar. If the icing is too thick to drizzle, stir 
in a little more milk. If it is too thin, add a little more 
confectioners' sugar. Let cool slightly before using. 

amaretti crisps 

MAKES 20 

To achieve the greatest volume, whisk the egg 
whites in a metal bowl set over a pot of simmering 
water until just warm to the touch. 

13/4 cups sliced almonds (about 7 ounces) 

1 cup confectioners' sugar 

2 large egg whites 

1/2 teaspoon pure almond extract 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Spread the almonds 
in a single layer on a rimmed baking sheet, and 
toast in the oven until lightly browned and fragrant, 
7 to 9 minutes. Remove from the oven; let cool. 
2. Combine the almonds and sugar in the bowl of 
a food processor fitted with the metal blade, and 
grind to a fine powder. Transfer to a medium bowl. 
532 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


In a separate bowl, beat the egg whites until stiff 
peaks form. Fold the egg whites into the almond 
mixture; fold in the almond extract. 

3. Line a baking sheet with parchment paper. Transfer 
the almond mixture to a pastry bag fitted with 
a   plain tip. Pipe 20   rings onto the prepared 
sheet, about 1 inch apart. Bake until golden 
brown and firm to the touch, about 25 minutes. Remove 
from the oven, and immediately transfer to 
a wire rack to cool completely. 
citrus cookies 

MAKES ABOUT 72 

2 cups all-purpose flour, plus more 
for dusting 


1/2 teaspoon baking powder 

1/4 teaspoon salt 

1 stick (8 tablespoons) unsalted butter, 
softened 


1 cup granulated sugar 
1 large egg 


1 tablespoon freshly grated lemon zest 
Colored sanding sugar, for decorating 


1. Whisk together the flour, baking powder, and salt. 
Beat the butter and sugar on medium-high speed 
until pale and fluffy, about 3 minutes. Beat in the 
egg, zest, and flour mixture. Divide the dough in 
half; wrap in plastic. Freeze until firm, 20 minutes. 
2. Preheat the oven to 325 degrees F. Unwrap one half on a 
lightly floured surface. Let stand 10 minutes. Roll 
out to 1/4 inch thick. Cut out circles with a   
round cookie cutter. Transfer the cookies to parchment-
lined baking sheets. Roll out the scraps; cut 
out circles. Repeat with the remaining dough. 
3. Lightly press one end of a clean 1  spool 
onto the surface of each cookie. Refrigerate the 
dough on the sheets 10 minutes. 
4. Sprinkle sanding sugar into the imprint on the 
cookies; brush off excess. Bake until golden, about 
14 minutes. Cool on the sheets set on wire racks. 
Store airtight up to 1 week. 
mixed fruit and nut cookies 

MAKES ABOUT 36 

21/4 cups all-purpose flour 

1 teaspoon baking soda 
1 teaspoon salt 


1 cup (2 sticks) unsalted butter, room 
temperature 


1 cup packed light-brown sugar 

1/2 cup granulated sugar 
2 large eggs 


1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 
11/2 cups sweetened shredded coconut 

11/2 cups chopped dried apricots 
11/2 cups dried cherries 

11/2 cups sliced blanched almonds 
11/2 cups chopped pistachios 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Line 2 baking sheets 
with parchment paper, and set aside. Whisk together 
the flour, baking soda, and salt in a medium 
bowl; set aside. 
2. In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the 
paddle attachment, cream the butter on medium 
speed until smooth. Add the sugars, and beat until 
light and fluffy, about 3 minutes. Beat in the eggs 
1 at a time until combined; beat in the vanilla. 
3. Add the flour mixture; beat on low speed until 
combined. Add the coconut, apricots, cherries, almonds, 
and pistachios; beat until combined. 
4. Drop the batter, 2 heaping tablespoons at a time, 
onto the prepared baking sheets, about 2 inches 
apart. Bake until golden brown, 12 to 15 minutes, rotating 
the pans halfway through. Remove from the 
oven, and transfer cookies on the parchment-paper 
lining to a wire rack to cool completely. 
COOKIES AND CANDY 533 


cashew-caramel cookies 

MAKES ABOUT 36 

12/3 cups all-purpose flour 

1/2 teaspoon salt 
21/2 cups roasted, salted cashews 

2 tablespoons plus 1 teaspoon canola oil 

1 stick (8 tablespoons) unsalted butter, 
softened 


3/4 cup packed light-brown sugar 
1/2 cup granulated sugar 
1 large egg 
1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 


24 soft caramel candy cubes (7 ounces) 
1/4 cup heavy cream 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Sift the flour and salt 
together. Coarsely chop 1 cup cashews; set aside. 
Process the remaining 11/2 cups cashews in a food 
processor until finely chopped. Pour in the oil. 
Process until creamy, about 2 minutes. 
2. Put the cashew mixture, butter, and sugars in the 
bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment; 
mix on medium speed until fluffy, about 
2 minutes. Mix in the egg and vanilla. Reduce speed 
to low; gradually add the flour mixture. Mix in the 
reserved chopped cashews. 
3. Shape the dough into 1  balls; space 2 inches 
apart on 2 parchment-lined baking sheets. Bake 6 
minutes; gently flatten with a spatula. Bake until 
the bottoms are just golden, 6 to 7 minutes more. 
Transfer sheets to wire racks; let cool completely. 
4. Melt the caramels with the cream in a small 
saucepan over low heat, stirring. Let cool. Using a 
spoon, drizzle the caramel over the cookies; let set. 
Store airtight in single layers. 
cornmeal-thyme cookies 

MAKES ABOUT 36 

These herb-flecked cookies are at once sweet and 
savory, making them perfect in the afternoon, 
with a cup of Earl Grey tea. They can also be 
served after dinner as a light dessert. 

13/4 cups all-purpose flour 

1 teaspoon baking soda 

1 cup stone-ground yellow cornmeal 

1/2 teaspoon salt 

8 ounces (2 sticks) unsalted butter, softened 
11/4 cups sugar 

2 large eggs 

3/4 cup dried currants 
1 tablespoon plus 1/2 teaspoon finely 
chopped fresh thyme 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F with racks in the upper 
and lower thirds. Line 2 baking sheets with parchment 
paper; set aside. Whisk together the flour, 
baking soda, cornmeal, and salt in a medium bowl; 
set aside. 
2. Put the butter and sugar in the bowl of an electric 
mixer fitted with the paddle attachment; cream 
on medium speed until pale and fluffy, about 3 minutes. 
Mix in the eggs, 1 at a time. Add the flour mixture; 
mix on low speed until just combined. Mix in 
the currants and thyme. 
3. Using a tablespoon or a 1  ice-cream scoop, 
drop rounded balls of dough onto the lined sheets, 
spacing them 2 inches apart. Bake, rotating and 
switching the positions of the sheets about halfway 
through, until pale golden, 10 to 12 minutes. Transfer 
the cookies, on the parchment, to a wire rack. 
Let cool completely. 
534 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


peanut butter-chocolate 
chip oatmeal cookies 

MAKES ABOUT 72 

This recipe calls for natural peanut butter, which 
has less sugar than regular and gives the cookies 
a richer peanut flavor. 

3 cups old-fashioned rolled oats 

1/3 cup whole-wheat flour 

1 teaspoon baking soda 

1 teaspoon baking powder 

1/2 teaspoon salt 

1 cup packed light-brown sugar 

1 cup granulated sugar 

8 ounces (2 sticks) unsalted butter, softened 

1/2 cup natural peanut butter 

2 large eggs 

1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 

2 cups salted peanuts 

2 cups semisweet chocolate chips 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. In a large bowl, stir together 
the oats, flour, baking soda, baking powder, 
and salt; set aside. 
2. Put the brown and granulated sugars, the butter, 
and the peanut butter in the bowl of an electric 
mixer fitted with the paddle attachment. Mix on 
medium speed until pale and fluffy, about 5 minutes. 
Mix in the eggs and vanilla, scraping down 
the sides of the bowl as needed. 
3. Reduce speed to low. Add the oat mixture, and 
mix until just combined. Mix in the peanuts and 
chocolate chips. 
4. Using a small (11/2-tablespoon) ice-cream scoop, 
make balls of dough, and place them 2 inches apart 
on parchment-paper-lined baking sheets. 
5. Bake until the cookies are golden and just set, 13 
to 15 minutes. Let cool on the sheets for 5 minutes. 
Transfer cookies to wire racks to cool completely. 
iced oatmeal cookies with 
golden raisins and applesauce 

MAKES ABOUT 30 

1 cup packed light-brown sugar 

1/2 cup granulated sugar 
4 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted 


1 large egg 
1/2 cup chunky-style applesauce 


11/2 cups old-fashioned rolled oats 
11/4 cups all-purpose flour 

1/2 teaspoon baking soda 
1/4 teaspoon baking powder 


1/4 teaspoon salt 
1 cup golden raisins 


13/4 cups confectioners' sugar 
3 tablespoons pure maple syrup 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees  F. Put the brown and 
granulated sugars and the butter in the bowl of an 
electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment. 
Mix on low speed until combined. Add the egg and 
applesauce; mix until well combined, 2 to 3 minutes; 
scraping down sides of bowl as needed. Add 
the oats, flour, baking soda, baking powder, and salt; 
mix until well combined. Mix in the raisins. 
2. Using a small (11/2-tablespoon) ice-cream scoop, 
make balls of dough, and place them 2 inches apart 
on parchment-paper-lined baking sheets. 
3. Bake until the cookies are golden and just set, 
13 to 15 minutes. Let cool on the sheets for 5 minutes. 
Transfer to a wire rack set over parchment 
paper to cool completely. 
4. Whisk the confectioners' sugar with the syrup 
and 3 tablespoons water until smooth. Drizzle the 
icing over the cookies; let set. 
COOKIES AND CANDY 535 


oatmeal bars 
with dates and walnuts 


MAKES 24 

You can use a blender or a food processor to 
grind the rolled oats; 11/4 cups rolled oats yields 
1 cup ground. 

1 cup finely ground old-fashioned 
rolled oats 


3/4 cup whole-wheat flour 
11/2 cups old-fashioned rolled oats 
11/2 teaspoons baking powder 

11/2 teaspoons salt 
1/2 teaspoon ground cinnamon 

1/4 teaspoon ground allspice 
2 cups packed light-brown sugar 


12 tablespoons (11/2 sticks) unsalted 
butter, softened 


3 large eggs 

21/2 teaspoons pure vanilla extract 
11/2 cups walnuts (51/2 ounces), toasted 
and chopped 
1 cup dates (5 ounces), pitted and chopped 

Vegetable oil cooking spray 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Whisk together the 
ground oats, flour, 1 cup whole oats, baking powder, 
salt, cinnamon, and allspice in a large bowl; set aside. 
2. Put the brown sugar and butter in the bowl of 
an electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment. 
Beat on medium speed until pale and fluffy, about 
5 minutes. Mix in the eggs and vanilla, scraping 
down the sides of the bowl as needed. 
3. Reduce speed to low. Add the oat mixture; mix 
until just combined. Mix in the walnuts and dates. 
4. Coat a 9 x 1  baking dish with cooking 
spray. Spread the batter evenly in the dish. Scatter 
the remaining 1/2 cup whole oats over the top. Bake 
until golden and a cake tester inserted into the center 
comes out clean, about 35 minutes. Cool completely 
in the pan on a wire rack; cut into bars. 
coconut cream bars 

MAKES 24 

The custard-filled crust can be refrigerated for up 
to 2 days. Wait until just before serving to cut the 
dessert into bars; if crumbs and filling stick to the 
knife, wipe the blade clean between slices. Then 
decorate each bar with whipped cream. If you 
don't have a pastry bag, use a resealable plastic 
bag with a corner cut off. 

21/2 cups sweetened flaked coconut 

3 boxes (5.3 ounces each) shortbread 
cookies, coarsely broken 


1 cup plus 2 tablespoons granulated sugar 
6 tablespoons cornstarch 


1/2 teaspoon salt 
41/2 cups whole milk 

6 large egg yolks 

6 tablespoons cold unsalted butter, 
cut into small pieces 


11/2 cups heavy cream 
3 tablespoons confectioners' sugar 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Spread the coconut in 
an even layer on a rimmed baking sheet. Bake, stirring 
once or twice, until golden, 8 to 10 minutes. Let 
cool completely. Leave the oven on. 
2. Process the cookies and 1/2 cup coconut in a food 
processor until finely ground and the mixture begins 
to clump together, about 2 minutes. Transfer 
the mixture to a 9 x 1  rimmed baking sheet; 
press into an even layer on the bottom. Bake until 
golden and firm to the touch, 12 to 15 minutes. Let 
cool on the sheet on a wire rack. 
3. Whisk together the granulated sugar, cornstarch, 
and salt in a large saucepan. Whisk in the milk and 
egg yolks. Cook over medium heat, whisking constantly, 
until the mixture comes to a boil, 5 to 6 minutes. 
Continue to cook, whisking constantly, until 
thickened, about 3 minutes more. Remove from 
heat. Add the butter, whisking until combined. Stir 
in 11/2 cups coconut. 
4. Spoon the custard onto the cooled crust; smooth 
the top with an offset spatula. Press plastic wrap directly 
onto the custard surface to prevent a skin 
from forming. Refrigerate until set, about 3 hours. 
536 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


5. Beat the cream and confectioners' sugar in a large 
chilled stainless-steel bowl until stiff peaks form. 
6. Cut the custard-filled crust into 24 bars (each 
about 3 x 11/2 inches). Transfer to a platter. Spoon 
whipped cream into a pastry bag fitted with a 
medium star tip. Beginning at one corner, pipe a 
zigzag pattern over each bar. Sprinkle the bars with 
the remaining 1/2 cup coconut. 
chocolate-almondmarsala 
cookies 

MAKES ABOUT 24 

1/2 cup whole raw almonds with skins 

11/4 cups all-purpose flour, plus more 
for dusting 

2 teaspoons baking powder 
11/4 teaspoons ground cinnamon 

3/4 teaspoon coarse salt 
2 large eggs 
1/3 cup Marsala wine 
1/2 cup finely chopped candied orange peel 


4 ounces semisweet chocolate, chopped 
3 tablespoons honey 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Toast the almonds in 
the oven on a rimmed baking sheet until fragrant 
and lightly toasted, about 12 minutes. Let cool; 
coarsely chop. Reduce the oven temperature to 250 degrees F. 
2. Stir together the flour, baking powder, cinnamon, 
and salt. Beat 1 egg with the wine; stir into the flour 
mixture. Stir together the almonds, orange peel, and 
chocolate; stir into the flour mixture. Stir in the honey. 
3. Knead the dough on a generously floured work 
surface just until it holds its shape. Divide the 
dough into 2 pieces; pat each into a 101/2 x 11/2 x 1inch 
rounded log. Refrigerate the dough 15 minutes. 
4. Cut each log into  -thick slices. Gently 
press the edges of each slice to flatten. Lightly beat 
the remaining egg. Place the cookies, standing vertically, 
on a parchment-paper-lined baking sheet. 
Brush the tops with beaten egg. 
5. Bake 20 minutes. Raise the oven temperature to 
350 degrees F; bake until the cookies are deep golden brown, 
10 to 12 minutes. Let cool on the sheet on a wire rack. 
cream cheese-walnut cookies 

MAKES ABOUT 48 

4 cups all-purpose flour 

11/4 teaspoons salt 
1 pound (4 sticks) unsalted butter, softened 

6 ounces cream cheese (not whipped), 
room temperature 


11/4 cups sugar 

2 tablespoons plus 1/2 teaspoon pure 
vanilla extract 


21/2 cups walnut halves (11/2 cups toasted 
and chopped; 1 cup finely chopped) 

1. Line 2 baking sheets with parchment paper; set 
aside. Whisk together the flour and salt in a large 
bowl; set aside. 
2. Put the butter and cream cheese in the bowl of 
an electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment. 
Mix on medium speed until pale and fluffy, about 
2 minutes. Mix in the sugar and vanilla. Reduce 
speed to low. Add the flour mixture, and mix until 
just combined (do not overmix). Mix in the toasted 
walnuts. 
3. On a clean work surface, divide dough in half; 
shape each piece into an 8 -long log (about 
2 inches in diameter). Wrap each log in parchment 
paper; freeze until firm, about 30 minutes. 
4. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F with racks in the upper 
and lower thirds. Remove one log from the freezer. 
Roll the log in 1/2 cup chopped walnuts, coating it 
completely. Cut the log into  -thick rounds. 
Transfer the rounds to parchment-lined sheets. 
5. Bake, switching the positions of the sheets and 
rotating halfway through, until the cookies are 
golden around the edges, 18 to 20 minutes. Transfer 
to wire racks; let cool completely. Repeat the 
process with the remaining dough using cooled 
baking sheets. 
COOKIES AND CANDY 537 


caramel crunch 

MAKES ABOUT 2 CUPS 

When making the caramel in step 2, keep an eye 
on your pan; the best indicator that the caramel is 
ready is appearance, not cooking time. Just before 
the syrup reaches the desired color, remove 
it from the heat; the caramel will continue cooking 
for a few more seconds. 

2 cups toasted, sliced almonds (51/2 ounces) 
1/2 cup water 
2 cups sugar 
1/4 teaspoon coarse salt 


1. Prepare an ice-water bath; set aside. Spread almonds 
on parchment paper to form a 9 x 1  
rectangle. 
2. Make the caramel: Pour the water into a medium 
heavy-bottom saucepan. Add the sugar and salt. 
Cook over medium heat, gently stirring occasionally, 
until the syrup is clear. 
3. Continue cooking, without stirring, until the 
syrup comes to a boil, washing down the sides of 
the pan with a wet pastry brush 2 or 3 times to prevent 
crystals from forming. Let the syrup boil, gently 
swirling the pan occasionally, until medium 
amber. Remove from heat and set the pan in the ice-
water bath to stop the cooking. 
3. Pour the caramel over the almonds to cover. Let 
cool until hardened. Peel off the parchment; break 
the brittle into pieces. 
lemon poppyseed cookies 

MAKES ABOUT 30 

1/4 cup fresh lemon juice, plus 31/2 teaspoons 
freshly grated lemon zest (2 to 3 lemons) 


8 ounces (2 sticks) unsalted butter 
2 cups all-purpose flour 


1 teaspoon baking powder 
1/2 teaspoon salt 


11/2 cups sugar 
1 large egg 

2 teaspoons pure vanilla extract 

1 tablespoon poppy seeds, plus more 
for sprinkling 


1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Bring the lemon juice 
to a simmer in a small saucepan over medium heat; 
cook until reduced by half. Add 1 stick butter; stir 
until melted. 
2. Whisk together the flour, baking powder, and salt. 
Cream the remaining stick butter and 1 cup sugar 
on medium speed in the bowl of an electric mixer 
fitted with the paddle attachment. Mix in the egg 
and lemon butter. Mix until pale, about 3 minutes. 
Mix in the vanilla and 2 teaspoons zest. Mix in the 
flour mixture and poppy seeds. 
3. Stir together the remaining 1/2 cup sugar and 11/2 
teaspoons zest. Roll spoonfuls of dough into 
1  balls; roll them in the sugar mixture. Place 
2 inches apart on baking sheets. Press each with the 
flat end of a glass dipped in the sugar mixture until 
1/4 inch thick. Sprinkle with seeds. 
4. Bake until just browned around bottom edges, 
10 to 11 minutes. Transfer to wire racks; let cool completely. 
Store in an airtight container up to 1 week. 
538 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


apricot-walnut biscotti 

MAKES 24 

Sanding sugar is used to coat the biscotti because 
it won't melt in the oven. We dipped half of 
the batch in melted chocolate. To dip them all, 
double the amount of bittersweet chocolate. 

1 cup walnut halves 

2 cups all-purpose flour, plus more 
for dusting 


1/2 teaspoon baking powder 
1/4 teaspoon salt 


5 tablespoons unsalted butter, softened, 
plus more for the baking sheet 


1 cup granulated sugar 

1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 
2 large eggs, lightly beaten 


3/4 cup dried apricots, cut into   dice 
1 large egg white, lightly beaten 
2 tablespoons sanding sugar 

4 ounces bittersweet chocolate, 
coarsely chopped 


1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Spread out the nuts on 
a baking sheet; toast in the oven, stirring occasionally, 
until fragrant and golden brown, about 8 
minutes. Remove from the oven; reduce temperature 
to 350 degrees F. 
2. Rub the nuts between paper towels to remove 
loose skins; coarsely chop the nuts. 
3. Sift the flour, baking powder, and salt together 
into a medium bowl; set aside. Put the butter and 
granulated sugar in the bowl of an electric mixer 
fitted with the paddle attachment. Cream on 
medium speed until pale and fluffy. Mix in the 
vanilla. Mix in the eggs in 2 batches, mixing each 
until just combined. On low speed, mix in the flour 
mixture until just combined. Stir in the walnuts and 
apricots by hand. 
4. Butter a large baking sheet; set aside. Transfer 
5. Transfer the logs to a cutting board. Clean and 
butter the large baking sheet; set aside. Brush the 
logs with egg white, and sprinkle with sanding 
sugar. Cut each log crosswise on the diagonal into 
12 pieces (each 1/2 inch thick). Lay flat on the buttered 
sheet. Bake 7 minutes; turn the pieces. Bake 
until golden, 7 to 9 minutes. Transfer to a wire rack; 
let cool until crisp. 
6. Melt the chocolate in a heatproof bowl set over 
a pan of simmering water, stirring occasionally, 
until smooth, 3 to 5 minutes. Let cool slightly. 
7. Dip a flat side of 12 biscotti in melted chocolate, 
arranging the cookies, chocolate side up, on parchment 
paper as you work. Let stand until the chocolate 
is set, about 30 minutes. Store in an airtight 
container, keeping the chocolate-dipped ones in a 
single layer on top, up to 2 days. 
MAKING BISCOTTI 

For wonderfully crisp biscotti, follow these 
simple steps: 


1. After mixing the dough, use your hands to 
pat it into a long loaf. Be sure to flatten it in 
the middle and to keep the ends the same 
width as the rest. 
2. Once the loaf has been baked, let it cool for 
15 minutes before cutting into slices. If the 
loaf is too hot, the slices may crumble; if allowed 
to sit too long, the loaf will be difficult 
to slice. Using a serrated knife is the best 
way to cut cleanly. 
3. You do not want the biscotti to become too 
hard to eat, so watch them closely after 
about 10 minutes, and take them out of the 
oven when they are just starting to turn 
golden around the edges. Let the biscotti cool 
completely on the baking sheet so they get 
perfectly crisp and dry, ideal for dunking 
into espresso or your favorite dessert wine. 
the dough to a lightly floured surface; divide in half. 
With floured hands, shape each half into an 81/2 x 
21/2 x   log. Place the logs at least 2 inches apart 
on the buttered baking sheet. Bake until golden, 
about 30 minutes. Transfer the sheet to a wire rack; 
let the logs stand 10 minutes. 

COOKIES AND CANDY 539 


cornmeal biscotti 
with dates and almonds 


MAKES ABOUT 24 

The biscotti may be stored in an airtight container 
at room temperature for up to 2 weeks. 

11/4 cups all-purpose flour 

11/4 cups yellow cornmeal 
1/2 teaspoon baking powder 

1/2 teaspoon salt 
6 tablespoons unsalted butter, 
room temperature 
1 cup sugar 


2 large eggs 
2 teaspoons pure orange extract 


1 tablespoon freshly grated orange zest 
1 cup chopped pitted dates 


1 cup chopped almonds 
1 teaspoon anise seed 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F, with a rack in the center. 
Line a baking sheet with parchment paper, and 
set aside. Combine the flour, cornmeal, baking powder, 
and salt in a medium bowl, and mix thoroughly 
with a whisk or fork; set aside. 
2. In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the 
paddle attachment, cream the butter on medium 
speed until smooth. Add the sugar, and beat until 
light and fluffy. Beat in the eggs 1 at a time until 
well combined; beat in the orange extract. 
3. Add the flour mixture; beat on low speed until 
just combined. Add the orange zest, dates, almonds, 
and anise seed, and beat until combined. 
4. Transfer the dough to the prepared baking sheet; 
using your hands, pat into a log that is roughly 
14 x 31/2 inches. Bake until firm, lightly browned, 
and slightly cracked on top, 30 to 35 minutes. Remove 
from the oven; let cool 15 minutes. 
5. Transfer the log to a cutting board, leaving the 
parchment behind on the sheet. Using a serrated 
knife, cut the log crosswise into  -thick slices. 
Arrange the slices on a baking sheet. Bake until 
they just begin to brown at the edges, 15 to 18 minutes, 
rotating the pan halfway through. Remove 
from the oven; let cool on the baking sheet. 
almond macaroons 

MAKES 12 

The cookies can be stored in an airtight container 
at room temperature for up to 5 days. 

4 ounces almond paste (about 
51/2 tablespoons) 


1/2 cup confectioners' sugar, plus 
more for dusting 


Pinch of fine salt 
1 large egg white 


1/4 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 
1/4 cup sliced almonds 


1. Preheat the oven to 300 degrees F. Line a baking sheet 
with parchment paper, and set aside. Place the almond 
paste, sugar, and salt in the bowl of an electric 
mixer fitted with the paddle attachment; beat 
on medium speed until the mixture looks crumbly, 
about 3 minutes. Add the egg white and vanilla. 
Continue beating until the mixture is smooth and 
thick, about 3 minutes more. 
2. Drop 12 even tablespoons of batter about 2 inches 
apart on the lined baking sheet; place 2 almond 
slices on each mound of dough. Bake the cookies, 
rotating the baking sheet halfway through, until 
golden brown, 20 to 25 minutes. Transfer the cookies 
to a wire rack; let cool completely. Just before 
serving, lightly dust with confectioners' sugar. 
540 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


key lime bars 

MAKES 16 

This recipe is based on the famous Key Lime pie 
from Joe's Stone Crab restaurant in Miami 
Beach. If you can't find Key limes, use regular 
fresh lime juice. The bars will keep, wrapped in 
plastic, in the refrigerator for up to 3 days. 

53/4 ounces graham crackers (about one-
third of a 1-pound box), ground to fine 
crumbs in a food processor (1 cup plus 
21/2 tablespoons) 

1/3 cup sugar 
5 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted 


3 large egg yolks 

11/2 teaspoons finely grated lime zest 
(about 2 limes) 

1 can (14 ounces) sweetened 
condensed milk 


2/3 cup fresh Key lime juice (about 
20 Key limes) 


1/4 cup heavy cream 

2 Key limes, thinly sliced into half-moons, 
for garnish 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees  F. Stir together the 
crumbs, sugar, and butter in a small bowl. Press 
evenly onto the bottom of an 8-inch-square glass 
pan. Bake until dry and golden brown, about 10 
minutes. Let cool in the pan on a wire rack. Leave 
the oven on. 
2. Place the egg yolks and zest in the bowl of an 
electric mixer fitted with the whisk attachment; beat 
on high speed until the mixture is very thick, about 
5 minutes. On medium speed, pour in the condensed 
milk in a steady stream, scraping down the 
sides of the bowl. Beat on high speed until thick, 
about 3 minutes. On low speed, add the lime juice; 
mix until just combined. 
3. Pour the filling over the crust; spread evenly. Bake 
until just set, about 10 minutes. Let cool completely 
on a wire rack. Cover with plastic wrap; chill at least 
4 hours or overnight. 
4. When ready to serve, beat the heavy cream until 
stiff peaks just form. Cut dessert into 11/2 x   
rectangles. Garnish each bar with whipped cream 
and a slice of Key lime. 
double chocolate brownies 

MAKES 9 LARGE OR 16 SMALL SQUARES 

Store brownies in an airtight container at room 
temperature for up to 3 days. 

6 tablespoons unsalted butter, 
plus more for the pan 


6 ounces good-quality semisweet 
chocolate, coarsely chopped 


1/4 cup unsweetened cocoa powder 
(not Dutch-process) 


3/4 cup all-purpose flour 
1/4 teaspoon baking powder 
1/4 teaspoon salt 
1 cup sugar 


2 large eggs 
2 teaspoons pure vanilla extract 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Line a buttered 8-inchsquare 
baking pan with foil or parchment paper, allowing 
2 inches to hang over the sides. Butter the 
lining (excluding overhang); set the pan aside. 
2. Put the butter, chocolate, and cocoa in a heatproof 
medium bowl set over a pan of simmering 
water; stir until the butter and chocolate are melted. 
Let cool slightly. 
3. Whisk together the flour, baking powder, and salt 
in a separate bowl; set aside. 
4. Put the sugar, eggs, and vanilla in the bowl of 
an electric mixer fitted with the whisk attachment, 
and beat on medium speed until pale, about 4 minutes. 
Add the chocolate mixture; beat until combined. 
Add the flour mixture; beat, scraping down 
the sides of the bowl, until well incorporated. 
5. Pour the batter into the prepared pan; smooth 
the top with a rubber spatula. Bake until a cake 
tester inserted into the brownies (avoid center and 
edges) comes out with a few crumbs but is not wet, 
about 35 minutes. Let cool slightly in the pan, about 
15 minutes. Lift out the brownies; let cool completely 
on a wire rack before cutting into squares. 
COOKIES AND CANDY 541 


warm cream cheese brownies 

MAKES 12 

for the cream cheese batter 

6 ounces cream cheese, room temperature 

4 tablespoons unsalted butter, room 
temperature, plus more for the pan 


1/2 cup sugar 
2 large eggs 


1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 
2 tablespoons all-purpose flour 


1/2 cup semisweet chocolate chips 
(31/2 ounces) 


for the chocolate batter 

4 ounces unsweetened chocolate 
4 ounces semisweet chocolate 


6 tablespoons unsalted butter 
4 large eggs 


11/2 cups sugar 
2 teaspoons pure vanilla extract 

1 cup all-purpose flour 
1 teaspoon baking powder 


1 teaspoon salt 
1 cup semisweet chocolate chips (7 ounces) 


1. Preheat the oven to 325 degrees F. Butter a 9 x 1  
baking pan; set aside. Make the cream cheese batter: 
Beat the cream cheese, butter, and sugar in the 
bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment 
until well blended. Add eggs, 1 at a time, 
beating well and scraping down the sides of the 
bowl at least once. Add the vanilla, and beat until 
combined. Using a large rubber spatula, fold in the 
flour and chocolate chips. 
2. Make the chocolate batter: Melt the chocolates 
and butter in a medium heatproof bowl set over a 
pan of barely simmering water. Remove the bowl 
from the heat, and let cool completely. 
3. In a large bowl, using a handheld whisk, beat the 
eggs, gradually adding the sugar, until the mixture 
is thick and pale. Whisk in the cooled chocolate 
mixture. Add the vanilla, and combine well. 
4. Combine the flour, baking powder, and salt in a 
medium bowl, and fold into the chocolate mixture. 
Fold in the chocolate chips. Measure out about 
1/2 cup chocolate batter, and set aside. Spoon the 
rest of the batter into the prepared baking pan, and 
spread the cream cheese batter evenly over the top. 
Drop the reserved chocolate batter in dollops on 
top. Run a knife or offset spatula all the way through 
the batters to create a swirling effect. 

5. Bake until a cake tester inserted near the edges 
comes out clean, about 35 minutes. The center will 
still be fairly soft, but it will continue to firm after 
being removed from the oven. Transfer to a wire 
rack; let cool in the pan before cutting into squares. 
peanut butter swirl brownies 

MAKES 9 LARGE OR 16 SMALL SQUARES 

Store brownies in an airtight container at room 
temperature for up to 3 days. 

for the batter 

8 tablespoons (1 stick) unsalted butter, cut 
into small pieces, plus more for the pan 


2 ounces good-quality unsweetened 
chocolate, coarsely chopped 


4 ounces good-quality semisweet chocolate, 
coarsely chopped 

2/3 cup all-purpose flour 

1/2 teaspoon baking powder 

1/4 teaspoon salt 

3/4 cup granulated sugar 
3 large eggs 
2 teaspoons pure vanilla extract 

for the filling 

4 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted 

1/2 cup confectioners' sugar 

3/4 cup smooth peanut butter 
1/4 teaspoon salt 
1/2 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 

1. Preheat the oven to 325 degrees F. Line a buttered 8-inchsquare 
baking pan with foil or parchment paper, allowing 
2 inches to hang over the sides. Butter the 
lining (excluding the overhang); set the pan aside. 
2. Make the batter: Put the butter and chocolates 
in a heatproof medium bowl set over a pan of simmering 
water; stir until melted. Let cool slightly. 
542 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


3. Whisk together the flour, baking powder, and salt 
in a separate bowl, and set aside. 
4. Whisk the granulated sugar into the chocolate 
mixture. Add the eggs, and whisk until the mixture 
is smooth. Stir in the vanilla. Add the flour mixture; 
stir until well incorporated. 
5. Make the filling: Stir together the butter, confectioners' 
sugar, peanut butter, salt, and vanilla in 
a bowl until smooth. 
6. Pour one-third of the batter into the prepared 
pan, and spread evenly with a rubber spatula. Place 
dollops of filling (about 1 tablespoon each) about 
1 inch apart on top of the batter. Drizzle the remaining 
batter on top, and gently spread to fill the 
pan. Place dollops of the remaining filling on top. 
7. With a butter knife, gently swirl the filling into 
the batter, running the knife lengthwise and crosswise 
through the layers. Bake until a cake tester 
inserted into the brownies (avoid center and edges) 
comes out with a few crumbs but is not wet, about 
45 minutes. Let cool slightly in the pan, about 15 
minutes. Lift out the brownies; let cool completely 
on a wire rack before cutting into squares. 
coconut swirl brownies 

MAKES 9 LARGE OR 16 SMALL SQUARES 

for the filling 

2 tablespoons granulated sugar 
2/3 cup sweetened condensed milk 


11/4 cups unsweetened shredded coconut 
1 large egg 

1/2 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 

for the batter 

Ingredients for Peanut Butter Swirl 
Brownies batter (opposite) 


1. Make the filling: Stir together the sugar, condensed 
milk, coconut, egg, and vanilla in a medium 
bowl; set aside. 
2. Make the batter: Follow the recipe for Peanut 
Butter Swirl Brownies through step 4. 
3. Follow steps 6 and 7 of the Peanut Butter Swirl 
Brownies recipe. 
truffle brownies 

MAKES 12 

Store these brownies in the refrigerator, covered, 
for up to 2 days. Bring to room temperature before 
serving. You can also make the brownies in 
an 8-inch-square baking pan (prepare the pan as 
directed in step 1 of Double Chocolate Brownies, 
page 541). 

for the batter 

4 tablespoons unsalted butter, 
plus more for the pan 


3 ounces good-quality unsweetened 
chocolate, coarsely chopped 


1/2 cup all-purpose flour 

1/4 teaspoon baking powder 
1/2 teaspoon salt 


1 cup sugar 
2 large eggs 


1/4 cup milk 
1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 


for the topping 

4 ounces good-quality semisweet 
chocolate, coarsely chopped 


2/3 cup heavy cream 
Heart-shaped sprinkles, for garnish 


1. Preheat the oven to 325 degrees F. Butter a 9-inch spring-
form pan, and set aside. 
2. Make the batter: Put the butter and chocolate in 
a heatproof medium bowl set over a pan of simmering 
water; stir until melted. Let cool slightly. 
3. Whisk together the flour, baking powder, and salt 
in a separate bowl; set aside. 
4. Put the sugar and eggs in the bowl of an electric 
mixer fitted with the whisk attachment, and beat 
on medium speed until pale and fluffy, about 4 minutes. 
Add the chocolate mixture, milk, and vanilla, 
and beat until combined. Add the flour mixture; 
beat, scraping down the sides of the bowl, until well 
incorporated. 
COOKIES AND CANDY 543 


5. Pour the batter into the prepared pan. Bake until 
a cake tester inserted into the brownies (avoid center 
and edges) comes out with a few crumbs but is 
not wet, 27 to 30 minutes. Let cool completely in 
the pan. 
6. Make the topping when the brownies are cool: 
Put the chocolate in a medium bowl. Heat the cream 
in a small saucepan over medium-high heat until 
just simmering. Pour over the chocolate; let stand 
5 minutes. Gently stir until smooth. Allow the 
ganache to cool, stirring every 10 minutes, until 
slightly thickened, 25 to 30 minutes. 
7. Pour the ganache over the cooled brownies in the 
pan; let set, about 20 minutes. Refrigerate until cold, 
30 minutes to 1 hour. Let brownies stand at room 
temperature at least 15 minutes before serving. Lift 
out the brownies; cut into wedges, wiping the knife 
with a hot, damp cloth between each cut. Scatter 
sprinkles on top. 
turtle brownies 

MAKES 8 

for the batter 

Ingredients for Truffle Brownies batter 
(page 543) 

for the topping 
1 cup sugar 
1/3 cup heavy cream 
1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 
1/2 teaspoon salt 
1 cup coarsely chopped toasted pecans 
(4 ounces) 

1. Preheat the oven to 325 degrees F. Line a buttered 8-inchsquare 
baking pan with foil or parchment paper, allowing 
2 inches to hang over the sides. Butter the 
lining (excluding overhang); set the pan aside. 
2. Make the batter: Follow steps 2 through 5 of the 
Truffle Brownies recipe. 
3. Make the topping when the brownies are cool: 
Bring 1/3 cup water and the sugar to a boil in a 
medium saucepan over medium-high heat, stirring, 
until the sugar has dissolved. When the water 
comes to a boil, stop stirring, and wash down the 
sides of the pan with a wet pastry brush to prevent 
crystals from forming. Continue to cook, swirling 
the pan occasionally, until the mixture is medium 
amber, 5 to 7 minutes. 

4. Remove from heat, and immediately add the 
cream, vanilla, and salt. Gently stir with a clean 
wooden spoon or heatproof spatula until smooth. 
Add the pecans; stir until the caramel begins to cool 
and thickens slightly, about 1 minute. 
5. Pour the caramel over the brownies; spread 
evenly with an offset spatula. Refrigerate until cold, 
30 minutes to 1 hour. 
walnut shortbread 

MAKES 16 WEDGES 

11/4 cups walnuts 

3/4 cup all-purpose flour 
1/2 cup whole-wheat flour 
2/3 cup confectioners' sugar 
1/2 teaspoon salt 
1 stick (1/2 cup) unsalted butter, melted 
2 tablespoons light olive or canola oil 
2 teaspoons finely grated lemon zest 
1 teaspoon fresh lemon juice 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Butter and flour two 
8-inch round cake pans; set aside. In a food processor, 
combine the nuts, flours, sugar, and salt; pulse 
until the nuts are finely ground but not oily. Add 
the butter, oil, lemon zest, and lemon juice; pulse 
until the mixture just comes together. 
2. Divide the mixture between the pans and press 
in until even. With a sharp knife, cut each round of 
dough into 8 wedges. Lightly prick the tops with 
the tines of a fork. Bake until set and pale tan, about 
22 minutes. 
3. Transfer to a wire rack and cut through each 
wedge. Cool 10 minutes, then invert onto a plate 
and transfer to a wire rack to cool completely. 
544 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


blackberry-almond 
shortbread squares 

MAKES 12 

10 tablespoons (11/4 sticks) unsalted butter, 
softened, plus more for the pan 


13/4 cups all-purpose flour, plus more for 
dusting 

1/2 cup whole blanched almonds (2 ounces) 

1/2 teaspoon salt 
1/2 teaspoon ground cinnamon 


3/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons confectioners' 
sugar, plus more for dusting 
1/4 teaspoon pure almond extract 
1 pound blackberries (about 4 cups) 


Freshly grated zest of 1 orange 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Butter a 9 x 1  
baking pan. Line with parchment; butter the lining. 
Dust with flour; tap out excess. Arrange the nuts in 
a single layer on a rimmed baking sheet. Bake until 
golden, 15 minutes; let cool. Grind in a food processor 
until fine. 
2. Whisk together the flour, nuts, salt, and cinnamon 
in a medium bowl; set aside. Put 3/4 cup plus 1 
tablespoon sugar and the butter in the bowl of an 
electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment; 
mix until pale and fluffy, about 3 minutes. Mix in 
the almond extract. Add the flour mixture in 2 
batches; mix until a crumbly dough forms. 
3. Press all but 1 cup dough onto the bottom of the 
pan. Toss the berries with the zest; scatter over the 
dough. Sprinkle with the remaining tablespoon 
sugar; crumble the reserved dough on top. Bake 
until golden, about 30 minutes. Let cool on a wire 
rack. Cut into 12 squares; dust with sugar. 
chocolate-caramel 
pecan clusters 


MAKES 12 

1 cup pecan halves (31/4 ounces) 
12 soft caramel candy cubes 
11/2 ounces bittersweet chocolate, broken 
into 12 pieces (1/2 inch each) 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Arrange the pecans 
in a single layer on a rimmed baking sheet; toast in 
oven until fragrant, about 10 minutes. Remove from 
the oven (leave the oven on); set aside 36 pecans 
on the baking sheet. Finely chop the remaining 
pecans (for about 1/4 cup); set aside. 
2. When the pecans are cool enough to handle, 
make 12 clusters by arranging 2 pecans vertically, 
side by side, below 1 pecan placed horizontally. 
Gently flatten each caramel; place 1 on top of each 
cluster. Bake the clusters 5 minutes. Remove from 
the oven (leave the oven on). 
3. Place 1 piece of chocolate on top of each cluster. 
Return to the oven; bake until the chocolate begins 
to melt, 1 to 2 minutes. Remove from the oven. With 
the back of a spoon, gently spread the chocolate over 
the caramel without completely covering it. 
4. Sprinkle the clusters with the reserved chopped 
pecans. Refrigerate until set, about 15 minutes. 
Bring to room temperature before serving. 
chocolate cookies 

MAKES ABOUT 40 

We cut the dough into assorted shapes using 
2- to 4-inch cookie cutters. 

3 cups sifted all-purpose flour, plus more for 
the work surface 


11/4 cups unsweetened cocoa powder 
1/2 teaspoon ground cinnamon 

1/4 teaspoon salt 

11/2 cups (3 sticks) unsalted butter, room 
temperature 

21/2 cups sifted confectioners' sugar 
2 large eggs, lightly beaten 

2 teaspoons pure vanilla extract 

COOKIES AND CANDY 545 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Into a large bowl, sift 
together the flour, cocoa, cinnamon, and salt; set 
aside. In a mixing bowl, cream the butter and sugar 
until light and fluffy. Beat in the eggs and vanilla. 
Add the flour mixture; beat on low speed until just 
combined. Divide the dough in half, and flatten into 
disks. Wrap each disk in plastic; chill at least 1 hour. 
2. On a lightly floured surface, roll out 1 disk to 
1/8 inch thick, dusting with flour as needed. Cut into 
shapes as desired. Transfer to baking sheets; chill 
until firm, about 15 minutes. 
3. Bake until the cookies are just firm to the touch, 
10 to 12 minutes, rotating the sheets halfway 
through. Transfer to wire racks to cool. Repeat with 
the remaining dough. 
lemon madeleines 

MAKES 24 

3/4 cup (11/2 sticks) unsalted butter, 
melted, plus more for the pan 
11/2 cups sifted cake flour (not self-rising) 

1/2 teaspoon baking powder 
1/4 teaspoon salt 


3 large whole eggs 
2 large egg yolks 


3/4 cup granulated sugar 
1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 
2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 
2 tablespoons finely grated lemon zest 


Confectioners' sugar, for dusting 
(optional) 


1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees  F. Lightly butter a 
madeleine pan; set aside. Into a medium bowl, sift 
together flour, baking powder, and salt. Set aside. 
2. In a mixing bowl, beat the eggs, yolks, granulated 
sugar, vanilla, and lemon juice and zest until thick 
and pale, about 5 minutes. Beat in the melted butter. 
Using a rubber spatula, gently fold the flour mixture 
into the egg mixture; let rest 30 minutes at 
room temperature. 

3. Pour the batter into the prepared pan, filling the 
molds three-quarters full. Bake until the cookies are 
crisp and golden around the edges, 7 to 8 minutes. 
Transfer the pan to a wire rack to cool slightly before 
inverting the cookies onto a serving platter. 
Dust with confectioners' sugar, if desired. 
elke wood's lemon squares 

MAKES TWELVE   SQUARES 

13/4 cups sifted all-purpose flour 
1/3 cup sifted confectioners' sugar 

1/4 teaspoon salt 

3/4 cup (11/2 sticks) chilled unsalted 
butter, cut into pieces, plus more 
for the baking dish 
1 teaspoon plus 1 tablespoon finely 
grated lemon zest 


1/3 cup almonds, toasted and chopped 
2 cups granulated sugar 


4 large eggs, beaten 
1/2 cup fresh lemon juice 


1/2 teaspoon baking powder 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Into a medium bowl, 
sift together 11/2 cups flour, the confectioners' sugar, 
and the salt. Cut in the butter, 1 teaspoon zest, and 
the almonds until the mixture just clings together. 
2. Press into a lightly buttered 9 x 1  baking 
dish. Bake until just firm and lightly golden, about 
20 minutes. Let cool slightly before filling. 
3. In a large nonreactive bowl, stir together the 
granulated sugar, eggs, lemon juice, baking powder, 
and remaining 1/4 cup flour and tablespoon zest 
until combined. Pour into the prepared crust. 
4. Bake until the filling is set and lightly browned, 
25 to 30 minutes. Transfer to a wire rack to cool. Cut 
into squares. 
546 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


lemon-blueberry petits fours 

MAKES 15 

We baked these treats in mini brioche pans; small 
fluted tartlet pans would work just as well. 

11/4 cups all-purpose flour 

11/2 tablespoons sugar, plus more for the 
blueberries 

1/2 cup (1 stick) chilled unsalted butter, 
cut into small pieces 


1 large egg yolk 

1/4 cup ice water 
11/2 cups Lemon Curd (page 656) 

15 fresh blueberries 

2 teaspoons meringue powder dissolved 
in 2 tablespoons warm water 


1. Pulse the flour and sugar in a food processor to 
combine. Add the butter; pulse until the mixture resembles 
coarse meal. In a small bowl, lightly beat 
the egg yolk and ice water. With the motor running, 
slowly pour the egg mixture into the processor; mix 
until the dough just comes together. Place on plastic 
wrap; press to flatten into a disk. Wrap; chill at 
least 1 hour. 
2. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. On a clean work surface, 
roll out the dough 1/8 inch thick. Using a 31/2inch 
biscuit cutter, cut out 15 rounds. Fit the rounds 
into pans; press into the bottom and sides. Chill at 
least 30 minutes. 
3. Line the tarts with parchment; fill with pie 
weights or dried beans. Bake 15 minutes; remove 
the paper and weights. Continue baking until 
golden, about 10 minutes. Transfer to a wire rack 
to cool completely. 
4. Using a toothpick, dip each blueberry in the 
meringue powder mixture; roll in sugar. Transfer to 
a parchment-lined baking sheet; let dry 30 minutes. 
5. Remove the tart shells from the pans. Fill each 
shell with about 2 teaspoons lemon curd, and top 
with a sugared blueberry. Serve chilled or at room 
temperature. 
carolynn's chocolate 
chip cookies 

MAKES 30 

The recipe for these delicious cookies comes 
from food writer and cookbook author Carolynn 
Carreno. 

2 cups plus 2 tablespoons all-purpose flour 

1/2 teaspoon salt 
1/2 teaspoon baking soda 


1 cup (2 sticks) unsalted butter 
1 cup plus 2 tablespoons firmly packed 
dark-brown sugar 
1/2 cup granulated sugar 


1 large whole egg 
1 large egg yolk 


1/2 tablespoon pure vanilla extract 
11/2 cups semisweet chocolate chips 

1 cup toasted walnuts, broken into large 
pieces (optional) 


1. In a large bowl, whisk together the flour, salt, and 
baking soda; set aside. In a medium saucepan over 
medium heat, melt the butter. Turn off the heat and 
add both sugars; whisk until combined. Transfer 
the mixture to a medium bowl, and let cool to room 
temperature. 
2. Whisk the egg, egg yolk, and vanilla into the butter 
mixture. Fold in the reserved flour mixture until 
just combined. Fold in the chips and nuts. Wrap the 
dough in plastic; chill until firm, about 30 minutes. 
3. Preheat the oven to 325 degrees F. Using 2 large spoons, 
place golf-ball-size mounds of dough 3 inches apart 
on baking sheets. Bake until the cookies are golden 
brown and the tops no longer look wet, 12 to 14 minutes. 
Allow the cookies to cool on the baking sheet 
5 minutes; transfer to a wire rack. Let cool completely 
before serving. 
COOKIES AND CANDY 547 


honey lace cookies 

MAKES 28 

2 tablespoons unsalted butter 

2 tablespoons light-brown sugar 
11/2 tablespoons honey 

2 tablespoons all-purpose flour 
Pinch of salt 


1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Line 2 large baking 
sheets with Silpats (French baking mats) or parchment 
paper. Set aside. In a small saucepan, melt the 
butter, sugar, and honey. Transfer to a bowl. Whisk 
in the flour and salt until smooth. 
2. Working quickly, drop 1/2 teaspoons of batter onto 
the prepared baking sheets, at least 3 inches apart. 
Bake until the cookies spread and turn golden 
brown, about 6 minutes. Transfer the sheet to a wire 
rack; let cool completely. With your fingers, carefully 
remove the cookies from the pan. 
soft and chewy 
chocolate chip cookies 

MAKES ABOUT 36 

If desired, use a small ice-cream scoop for 
uniform-size cookies. To make a cookie tart, press 
3 cups of this dough into a buttered and sugared 
9-inch round tart pan with a removable bottom or 
a 9-inch pie tin lined with buttered, sugared 
parchment. Bake at 325 degrees F until the edges are 
golden and the center is almost set, 40 to 45 minutes. 
Let cool at least 20 minutes, and remove 
from the pan. (Bake the remaining dough as 
cookies at 350 degrees F for 8 to 10 minutes.) 

21/4 cups all-purpose flour 

1/2 teaspoon baking soda 

1 cup (2 sticks) unsalted butter, 
room temperature 


1/2 cup granulated sugar 
1 cup packed light-brown sugar 


1 teaspoon salt 
2 teaspoons pure vanilla extract 


2 large eggs 

2 cups semisweet and/or milk chocolate 
chips (about 12 ounces) 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. In a small bowl, whisk 
together the flour and baking soda; set aside. In the 
bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment, 
combine the butter with both sugars; 
beat on medium speed until light and fluffy. Reduce 
speed to low; add the salt, vanilla, and eggs. Beat 
until well combined, about 1 minute. Add the flour 
mixture; mix until just combined. Stir in the chocolate 
chips by hand. 
2. Drop heaping tablespoon-size balls of dough 
about 2 inches apart on baking sheets lined with 
parchment paper. 
3. Bake until the cookies are golden around the 
edges but still soft in the center, 8 to 10 minutes. 
Remove from the oven, and let cool on the baking 
sheet 1 to 2 minutes. Transfer to a wire rack, and let 
cool completely. Store the cookies in an airtight 
container at room temperature up to 1 week. 
ADD-INS: Create variations on chocolate chip cookies 
with the following ingredients. Use one or two- 
or several. 

NUTS Add 1 cup coarsely chopped nuts-walnuts, 

pecans, macadamias-with the chips. 
ESPRESSO Add 2 tablespoons instant espresso powder 
to the dry ingredients; replace 1 cup flour with 
unsweetened cocoa powder for a mocha flavor. 


SHREDDED COCONUT Stir in 11/2 cups shredded sweet


ened coconut with the chips. 
COCOA Replace 1 cup flour with unsweetened cocoa 
powder to make double chocolate chip cookies. 


DRIED FRUIT Combine 1 cup chopped dried cherries 

or other dried fruit with the chips. 
GINGER Mix 1/2 cup finely chopped candied ginger 
or up to 1 teaspoon ground ginger into the dry 
ingredients. 


CANDY BITS Substitute 1 cup chips with chopped 

chocolate candies, such as malt balls. 
OATMEAL For hearty cookies, stir in 11/2 cups old-
fashioned rolled oats along with the chips. 

PEANUT BUTTER To make a chocolate-peanut butter 
combo, reduce the butter to 3/4 cup, and mix in 1/2 cup 
smooth peanut butter with the butter and sugars. 

548 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


pine nut cookies 

MAKES ABOUT 36 

2 cups pine nuts 

1 cup confectioners' sugar 
1/4 cup almond paste 


1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 
1 large egg 


1/2 cup all-purpose flour 
1/4 teaspoon baking powder 


1/4 teaspoon salt 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Process 3/4 cup pine 
nuts and the sugar, almond paste, and vanilla in a 
food processor until fine crumbs form. Add the egg; 
pulse to combine. Add the flour, baking powder, and 
salt; process just until the dough comes together. 
2. Roll the dough into   balls. Roll the balls in 
the remaining 11/4 cups pine nuts, gently pressing 
to coat. Space 2 inches apart on parchment-lined 
baking sheets. 
3. Bake until the cookies begin to turn golden 
brown, about 20 minutes. Let cool completely on 
the sheets on wire racks. 
coconut-date bars 

MAKES 8 

3 tablespoons unsweetened shredded 
coconut 


1 pound very soft dates, pitted 

1/4 cup walnuts, toasted and finely chopped 

Sprinkle 2 tablespoons coconut over the bottom 
of an 8-inch-square baking dish. Firmly press the 
dates into the coconut, covering the bottom of the 
dish. Sprinkle with the remaining tablespoon coconut 
and the walnuts, gently pressing them into 
the dates. Cut into   squares. The bars can be 
stored in an airtight container 2 to 3 days. 

FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 194 CALORIES, 2 G FAT, 

0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 46 G CARBOHYDRATE, 0 MG SODIUM, 

2 G PROTEIN, 5 G FIBER 

double chocolate chunk cookies 


MAKES ABOUT 36 

These rich cookies should seem a bit soft when 
you take them out of the oven. They firm as they 
cool, so be careful not to overbake them. 

1 cup all-purpose flour 

1/2 cup unsweetened Dutch-process 
cocoa powder 


1/2 teaspoon baking soda 
1/2 teaspoon salt 


8 ounces good-quality milk chocolate 
(4 ounces coarsely chopped, 4 ounces 
cut into   chunks) 


1 stick (8 tablespoons) unsalted butter 
11/2 cups sugar 

2 large eggs 
1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 


1. Preheat the oven to 325 degrees  F. Whisk together the 
flour, cocoa powder, baking soda, and salt in a 
medium bowl; set aside. Melt the coarsely chopped 
chocolate with the butter in a small heatproof bowl 
set over a pan of simmering water. 
2. Transfer the chocolate mixture to the bowl of an 
electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment. 
Add the sugar, eggs, and vanilla; mix on medium 
speed until combined. Reduce speed to low; gradually 
mix in the flour mixture. Fold in the chocolate 
chunks by hand. 
3. Scoop the batter using a 1  ice-cream scoop; 
place 2 inches apart on parchment-lined baking 
sheets. Bake until the cookies are flat and the surfaces 
begin to crack, about 15 minutes. Transfer 
on the parchment to wire racks. Let cool 5 minutes. 
The cookies can be stored in an airtight container 
at room temperature for up to 3 days. 
COOKIES AND CANDY 549 


lemon meringue bars 

MAKES 12 

2 sticks (16 tablespoons) unsalted 
butter, softened 


13/4 cups plus 2 tablespoons all-
purpose flour 

1/4 cup plus 3 tablespoons 
confectioners' sugar 


2 tablespoons plus 1 teaspoon 
freshly grated lemon zest 


1/4 teaspoon coarse salt 
6 large eggs plus 4 large egg whites 


21/4 cups plus 2 tablespoons 
granulated sugar 

3/4 cup plus 3 tablespoons fresh 
lemon juice 
1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Make the crust: Put 
the butter, flour, confectioners' sugar, 2 teaspoons 
lemon zest, and the salt in the bowl of an electric 
mixer fitted with the paddle attachment. Mix on 
medium speed until well blended. 
2. Transfer the mixture to a 9 x 1  rimmed baking 
sheet. Press the batter evenly into the baking 
sheet. Chill in the freezer 10 minutes. Bake until 
golden, 20 to 22 minutes. Let cool completely on a 
wire rack. 
3. Make the filling: Whisk together the whole eggs, 
13/4 cups plus 2 tablespoons granulated sugar, the 
lemon juice, and 1 tablespoon plus 2 teaspoons 
lemon zest. Pour over the crust. Bake until the filling 
is set, 18 to 20 minutes. Let cool completely on 
a wire rack. Keep the oven at 350 degrees F. 
4. Make the meringue topping: Put the egg whites 
and 1/2 cup granulated sugar in the clean bowl of an 
electric mixer fitted with the whisk attachment. Beat 
on medium-high speed until stiff peaks form. 
5. Using an offset spatula or the back of a spoon, 
spread the meringue over the filling, swirling to create 
soft peaks. Bake until the meringue begins to 
brown, 8 to 10 minutes. Let cool completely. Cut 
into bars. The bars can be refrigerated in an airtight 
container up to 1 day. 
chunky peanut, chocolate, 
and cinnamon cookies 

MAKES ABOUT 60 

You can make bite-size cookies by rolling the 
dough into smaller balls. 

2 cups all-purpose flour 

1 teaspoon baking soda 
1 teaspoon salt 


1/2 teaspoon ground cinnamon 

3/4 cup (11/2 sticks) unsalted butter, softened 
1/2 cup smooth peanut butter 
1 cup packed light-brown sugar 


1/2 cup granulated sugar 
2 large eggs 


11/2 cups semisweet chocolate chips 
2/3 cup roasted, salted peanuts, 
coarsely chopped 
2 teaspoons pure vanilla extract 

Chocolate or vanilla ice cream, 
for serving (optional) 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees  F. Whisk together the 
flour, baking soda, salt, and cinnamon in a medium 
bowl; set aside. Put the butter and peanut butter in 
the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle 
attachment; mix on medium speed until combined, 
about 2 minutes. Add the sugars; mix 2 minutes. 
Mix in the eggs until combined. 
2. Gradually add the flour mixture; mix until just 
combined. Fold in the chocolate chips, peanuts, and 
vanilla with a mixing spoon until well distributed. 
Refrigerate the dough until it is slightly firm, 15 
minutes. 
3. Roll the dough into   balls. Space 2 to 
3 inches apart on baking sheets lined with parchment 
paper. Flatten slightly. Bake until just golden, 
about 13 minutes. Transfer the cookies to wire racks 
to cool. Serve with ice cream, if desired. 
550 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


whole-wheat-raspberry bars 

MAKES ABOUT 30 

11/4 cups whole-wheat flour 

1 cup all-purpose flour, plus 
more for dusting 


1/4 cup wheat bran 

1/4 teaspoon salt 
1/4 teaspoon baking soda 


2/3 cup packed dark-brown sugar 
1 teaspoon finely grated lemon zest 


10 tablespoons unsalted butter, softened 
1 large egg 


1/4 cup smooth unsweetened applesauce 
1 cup raspberry jam 


1. Whisk together the flours, bran, salt, and baking 
soda in a medium bowl; set aside. Put the brown 
sugar and zest in the bowl of an electric mixer fitted 
with the paddle attachment; mix on medium 
speed until combined. Beat in the butter until fluffy. 
Beat in the egg until pale and smooth. 
2. Reduce speed to low. Mix in the flour mixture in 
3 batches, alternating with the applesauce. Divide 
the dough in half; wrap in plastic. Chill until firm, 
about 2 hours. 
3. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees  F. Roll out 1 piece of 
dough between 2 lightly floured sheets of parchment 
to a 91/2 x 11  rectangle, about 1/8 inch 
thick. If the dough becomes too soft, refrigerate 
until firm. Remove the top piece of parchment. Trim 
the dough 1/2 inch on all sides. Transfer the rectangle 
on the parchment to a baking sheet. 
4. Cut the rectangle in half lengthwise. Spread 1/4 
cup jam down half of each length, leaving a   
border. Fold the dough over; pinch to seal. Refrigerate 
until firm, about 20 minutes. Repeat with the 
remaining chilled dough and jam. 
5. Cut crosswise into 1 -wide bars, but do not 
separate them until after baking. Bake until golden 
brown, about 20 minutes. Let cool on the sheet on 
a wire rack. The bars can be stored in an airtight 
container at room temperature for up to 3 days. 
pumpkinseed crackle 

MAKES ABOUT 11/2 POUNDS 

The crackle can be stored in an airtight container 
at room temperature up to 1 month. 

2 cups hulled pumpkinseeds 

1/2 teaspoon vegetable oil 

1 teaspoon salt 

2 cups sugar 

1 cup dark corn syrup 

11/2 tablespoons unsalted butter, plus 
more for the baking sheet 

1. Toss the pumpkinseeds with the oil in a large 
bowl; transfer to a large, heavy-bottomed skillet. 
Toast over medium heat, stirring constantly, until 
the seeds crackle and turn pale golden, about 10 
minutes; remove from heat, and stir in the salt. 
Transfer to a baking sheet to cool. 
2. Stir together the sugar, 11/3 cups water, and the 
corn syrup in a large, heavy saucepan over medium 
heat. Cook, stirring, until the sugar is dissolved, 
about 3 minutes. Raise heat to high; don't stir, but 
occasionally wash down the sides of the pan with 
a pastry brush dipped in cold water to prevent crystals 
from forming. Cook until the mixture registers 
260 degrees  F (hard-ball stage) on a candy thermometer, 
10 to 15 minutes. Meanwhile, butter an 11 x 17-inch 
rimmed baking sheet; set aside. 
3. Remove the pan from the heat. Working quickly, 
stir in the butter and toasted pumpkinseeds until 
the butter is melted and the mixture is combined. 
Immediately pour into the buttered sheet, spreading 
it with the back of a spoon to form an even layer 
(avoid touching the syrup with your hands). Let cool 
completely on a wire rack. 
4. When the mixture is hard, flex the baking sheet 
to loosen and remove the crackle; break it into 
pieces with your hands. 
COOKIES AND CANDY 551 


chocolate sandwich cookies 

MAKES 36 

13/4 cups all-purpose flour, plus more 
for the work surface 

1/4 cup cocoa powder 
1/2 teaspoon baking powder 


1/4 teaspoon salt 
8 tablespoons (1 stick) unsalted butter 


1 cup sugar 
1 large egg 


1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 
1/2 cup heavy cream 


12 ounces white chocolate, finely chopped 

1. In a large bowl, sift together the flour, cocoa, baking 
powder, and salt. Set aside. 
2. Cream the butter and sugar until soft and creamy 
in the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle 
attachment. Beat in the egg and vanilla. 
3. Add the flour mixture, and mix on low speed until 
combined. Divide the dough in half; wrap each half 
in plastic wrap. Chill at least 1 hour. 
4. Preheat the oven to 325 degrees F. On a lightly floured 
surface, roll the dough to 1/8 inch thick. Cut into 11/2inch 
squares using a cookie cutter. Transfer to 
parchment-paper-lined baking sheets, and refrigerate 
until firm, about 30 minutes. Gather any 
scraps, wrap them in plastic wrap, and chill for 30 
minutes before rerolling and cutting into squares. 
Bake until the edges just begin to brown, about 12 
minutes. Transfer to wire racks to cool. 
5. To make the white chocolate ganache, bring the 
cream to a boil in a small saucepan. Remove from 
heat, and add 9 ounces white chocolate. Let stand 
for 5 minutes, covered. Transfer the mixture to a 
medium bowl, and stir until completely smooth. 
Place in the refrigerator, and chill until thick 
enough to spread, about 1 hour, stirring every 10 
minutes. Use an offset spatula to spread the 
ganache on half the cookies; top with the remaining 
cookies. 
6. Melt the remaining 3 ounces white chocolate in 
a small heatproof bowl set over a pan of simmering 
water. Make a small cone out of parchment paper, 
or fit a small pastry bag with a coupler and #2 Ateco 
tip. Fill, and decorate as desired. 
orange cornmeal shortbread 

MAKES 24 

1 cup (2 sticks) unsalted butter, softened 

3/4 cup confectioners' sugar, plus more 
for dusting 
2 teaspoons pure vanilla extract 

11/2 teaspoons orange zest 

2 cups all-purpose flour 

1/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons yellow cornmeal 

1 teaspoon salt 

1. Using an electric mixer fitted with the paddle 
attachment, beat the butter and sugar until creamy 
and smooth, about 2 minutes. Add the vanilla and 
zest. Beat well, scraping the sides of the bowl as necessary. 
With the mixer on low speed, mix in the 
flour, 2 tablespoons cornmeal, and salt until well 
combined, about 3 minutes. Form the dough into 
2 logs about 11/2 inches in diameter; wrap in plastic, 
and chill at least 1 hour. 
2. Preheat the oven to 300 degrees F. Place the remaining 
1/4 cup cornmeal on a sheet of parchment or waxed 
paper. Remove the plastic from the chilled dough; 
roll the logs in cornmeal to coat. Slice into   
rounds. Place on a baking sheet about 1 inch apart. 
Bake until pale golden all over, 25 to 30 minutes. 
Cool on a wire rack. Dust with sugar. 
552 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


peanut butter 
and chocolate cups 


MAKES ABOUT 30 SMALL PLUS 12 LARGE 

Keep the pan of simmering water nearby to rewarm 
the chocolate as you are working. You will 
need about 30 1  and 12 2  paper 
candy cups; they are available at most baking 
supply stores. 

10 ounces semisweet or bittersweet 
chocolate, coarsely chopped 


6 ounces cream cheese, room temperature 

1 cup smooth peanut butter 
1 cup sugar 


1/2 cup heavy cream 
Chopped peanuts, for garnish 


1. In a heatproof bowl set over a pan of simmering 
water, melt the chocolate, stirring occasionally, until 
it is smooth. Remove from heat; stir to cool slightly. 
2. Working with 1 paper cup at a time, fill halfway 
with melted chocolate; invert the cup over bowl of 
chocolate, and swivel to evenly coat the sides. Gently 
but quickly reinvert the cup; immediately place 
on a baking sheet in the refrigerator or freezer. If 
necessary, use a small pastry brush to fill in any 
holes so no paper cup is visible. Let the chocolate 
harden before filling, at least 30 minutes and up to 
2 days; cover with plastic wrap once it is set. 
3. In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the 
paddle attachment, beat the cream cheese until it 
is smooth. Add the peanut butter and sugar; beat 
until combined. In a separate bowl, whip the cream 
to form stiff peaks; fold into the peanut butter mixture. 
Place in the refrigerator until it is slightly firm, 
about 5 minutes. Transfer to a pastry bag fitted with 
an Ateco #863 open-star tip, and pipe the mixture 
into the cups. 
4. Place the cups in a single layer in an airtight container 
or baking pan, and cover the container or 
wrap pan with plastic, being careful not to touch 
the tops of the cups. Chill in the refrigerator up to 
4 hours. To serve, sprinkle a few chopped peanuts 
over the top of each cup. 
skillet-baked 
chocolate chip cookie 


SERVES 8 

2 cups all-purpose flour 

1 teaspoon baking soda 
1/2 teaspoon salt 


3/4 cup (11/2 sticks) unsalted butter, softened 
1/2 cup sugar 
3/4 cup packed light-brown sugar 
1 large egg 
2 teaspoons pure vanilla extract 

11/2 cups mixed milk and semisweet 
chocolate chips (about 9 ounces) 

2 pints vanilla ice cream 
Caramel Sauce (recipe follows) 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees  F. In a medium bowl, 
whisk together the flour, baking soda, and salt; set 
aside. In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with 
the paddle attachment, cream the butter and sugars 
until the mixture is light and fluffy, about 2 minutes. 
Add the egg and vanilla; mix until they are 
fully incorporated. Add the flour mixture, and beat 
until just combined. Stir in the chocolate chips. 
2. Transfer the dough to a 10-inch ovenproof skillet, 
and press to flatten, covering the bottom of the 
pan. Bake until the edges are brown and the top is 
golden, 40 to 45 minutes. Don't overbake; it will continue 
to cook a few minutes out of the oven. Transfer 
to a wire rack to cool, 15 to 20 minutes. Cut into 
8 wedges. Serve warm; top each wedge with a scoop 
of ice cream and some caramel sauce. 
caramel sauce 

MAKES ABOUT 1 CUP 

1 cup sugar 
1/4 teaspoon salt 


1/4 cup water 
1/2 cup heavy cream 


2 tablespoons unsalted butter 
1/2 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 


1. In a small saucepan, combine the sugar, salt, and 
water. Cook over medium heat until the sugar is a 
COOKIES AND CANDY 553 


medium amber color, about 7 minutes; wash the 
sides of the pan with a pastry brush dipped in water 
to prevent crystals from forming. Remove from heat. 

2. Stir in the heavy cream; add the butter, and stir 
until combined. Let cool to room temperature; stir 
in the vanilla. The sauce can be stored in an airtight 
container in the refrigerator up to 2 weeks. Reheat 
gently; serve at room temperature. 
navettes 

MAKES ABOUT 24 

Navettes are boat-shaped cakes from Provence 
traditionally flavored with orange water. 

1 teaspoon active dry yeast 

4 cups all-purpose flour, plus more 
for the work surface 
Pinch of salt 


4 tablespoons unsalted butter, 
room temperature 


1 cup sugar 

2 large eggs 
3 tablespoons orange-flower water 


Grated zest of 1 lemon 
Grated zest of 1 orange 


Olive oil, for the bowl and baking sheet 

1 egg yolk, beaten with 1 tablespoon 
water, for the glaze 


Crystal sugar, for sprinkling (optional) 

1. In a small bowl, dissolve the yeast in 2 tablespoons 
lukewarm water. Let stand until creamy, 
about 10 minutes. 
2. In another bowl, whisk together the flour and salt. 
Place the butter and sugar in the bowl of an electric 
mixer. Beat, using the paddle attachment, until 
soft and crumbly. Add the eggs, yeast, orange-flower 
water, and zests. Add the flour, 1 cup at a time, and 
beat on low speed until just combined. 
3. Transfer the dough to a floured work surface, and 
knead with your hands until smooth and no longer 
sticky. Form into a ball, place in an oiled bowl, cover, 
and leave to rest in a warm place for 30 minutes. 
4. Rub a large baking sheet with olive oil. Turn the 
dough out onto a lightly floured work surface, and 
cut into 3 equal portions. Using your hands, roll 
each portion into a log about 1 inch thick. Cut each 
log crosswise into pieces about 21/2 inches long. 
Shape the pieces into tapered boat shapes by rounding 
and somewhat raising the middle portions, and 
pinching the ends into points. Cover the baking 
sheet with a kitchen towel, and leave in a warm 
place for 2 hours. The boats will rise somewhat but 
will not double. 

5. Preheat oven to 375 degrees F. Using a sharp knife, make 
a lengthwise slash down each boat, about one-third 
of its depth. Using a pastry brush, paint the surface 
of each boat with egg-yolk glaze. Sprinkle with crystal 
sugar, if desired. Bake until golden, 25 to 30 minutes. 
Transfer to a wire rack to cool. 

brandy snaps 

MAKES 18 

You may substitute dark corn syrup for the 
golden syrup, but the flavor will vary slightly. If 
the cookies get too cool to shape, return them to 
the oven for a few seconds until they soften. 

1/2 cup all-purpose flour 

1/2 teaspoon ground ginger 

5 tablespoons unsalted butter 

1/3 cup sugar 

1/4 cup golden syrup 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Combine the flour and 
ginger with a whisk. Melt the butter in a small 
saucepan over medium heat. Add the sugar and 
golden syrup; cook, stirring with a wooden spoon, 
until the sugar is dissolved. Remove from heat; stir 
in the flour-ginger mixture. 
2. Line a rimmed baking sheet with a Silpat (a 
French nonstick baking mat) or parchment. Drop 
6 even tablespoons batter on the Silpat about 2 
inches apart; place in the oven. Bake until flat and 
golden brown, about 10 minutes. 
3. Let the cookies cool 2 minutes, until slightly firm; 
immediately wrap them, 1 at a time, around a wide 
round wooden spoon handle, and let set for 30 seconds. 
Transfer from the spoon handle to a cooling 
rack. Repeat with the remaining batter.


breads 



mrs. kostyra's babkas 

MAKES THREE 8-INCH BABKAS 

8 ounces (2 sticks) unsalted butter, 
softened, plus more for the molds 


2 cups whole milk 

3 envelopes active dry yeast (3 scant 
tablespoons), or 11/3 ounces compressed 
fresh yeast, crumbled 


1 cup plus a pinch of sugar 

1/2 cup warm water (about 110 degrees F) 
5 large eggs plus 4 large egg yolks 


1 teaspoon salt 
1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 


1 tablespoon orange-flavored liqueur 
Finely grated zest of 1 orange 


Finely grated zest of 1 lemon 

9 to 10 cups sifted all-purpose flour, 
plus more for dusting 


1 cup dried currants 
11/2 cups golden raisins 

1 cup dark raisins 
1 cup blanched almonds, coarsely chopped 

1 tablespoon heavy cream 

1. Butter 3 kugelhopf molds (each 11/2 quarts and 8 
inches in diameter); set aside. Butter a large bowl; 
set aside. Heat the milk and butter in a saucepan 
over medium-low, stirring, until the butter is melted. 
2. Sprinkle the yeast and a pinch of sugar over the 
warm water in a small bowl. Let stand until foamy, 
7 to 10 minutes. 
3. Whisk together 4 eggs and the egg yolks, 1 cup 
sugar, and the salt in a large bowl until thick, about 
3 minutes. Add the vanilla, liqueur, zests, yeast mixture, 
and milk mixture; whisk 1 minute more. With 
a wooden spoon, gradually stir in up to 10 cups 
flour, 1 cup at a time, until a sticky dough forms. Stir 
in the dried fruits and almonds. 
4. Turn out the dough onto a lightly floured surface; 
knead, dusting with flour if it seems sticky, 
until smooth and soft, about 10 minutes. Transfer 
to the buttered bowl. Loosely cover with buttered 
plastic wrap; let rise in a warm place until doubled 
in bulk, about 2 hours. Punch down the dough. 
Loosely cover with buttered wrap; let rise until doubled 
in bulk, 11/2 to 2 hours more. 

5. Punch down the dough; turn it out onto a lightly 
floured surface. Knead 1 minute. Divide the dough 
into 3 equal pieces. With lightly floured hands, roll 
each piece into an 18-inch-long rope. Fit each rope 
into a buttered mold; press the end of the rope into 
the dough to seal. Loosely cover with buttered wrap. 
Let rise until doubled in bulk, about 45 minutes. 
6. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Whisk together the 
remaining egg and the cream in a small bowl. Brush 
the dough with the egg wash. Bake until golden, 
about 35 minutes. Let cool slightly in molds on a 
wire rack, about 10 minutes. Unmold onto the rack, 
and let cool completely, larger sides down. 
TESTING YEAST 

Yeast is a kind of fungus that, when activated, 
produces carbon dioxide-the gas 
that causes breads to rise. Yeast feeds off of 
sugar and water and stays alive even when 
frozen; nonetheless, it loses some of its efficacy 
over time. Three varieties are available 
to bakers: cake, instant dry, and active dry, 
all of which can be used in any recipe that requires 
yeast. Cake yeast is fresh and perishes 
quickly; instant dry yeast and active dry 
yeast are in powder form and have a longer 
shelf life. 

All three types can be checked for efficacy 
with a simple test called proofing. In a glass 
measuring cup, stir 1 teaspoon sugar into 1/2 
cup warm water (105 degrees F to 110 degrees F); if the water 
is too hot, it will kill the yeast. Sprinkle the 
mixture with 1 teaspoon yeast. Instant dry 
yeast should react immediately; if it is active, 
it should foam and become creamy. 
Active dry and cake yeasts should react the 
same way within 10 minutes. If the yeast 
does not respond this way, do not use it. If it 
is active, remember to factor in the amount 
of tested yeast and water into the amounts 
called for in the recipe. 

556 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


pumpkin cornmeal doughnuts 

MAKES ABOUT 14   DOUGHNUTS 

AND 14 DOUGHNUT HOLES 

If you do not have a doughnut cutter, use a   
cookie cutter to cut out the doughnuts and a 
  cookie cutter to cut out the centers. 

23/4 cups all-purpose flour, plus more 
for the work surface 

4 teaspoons baking powder 
1/4 teaspoon table salt 


1 teaspoon ground cinnamon 

3/4 teaspoon ground allspice 
1 tablespoon minced orange zest 
1 cup fine cornmeal 


3 large eggs, lightly beaten 
1/2 cup granulated sugar 


1/2 cup sweetened condensed milk 
1 cup Pumpkin Puree (page 571), or canned 


4 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted 
8 cups vegetable oil, for frying 


1/4 cup confectioners' sugar 

1. Sift the flour, baking powder, salt, 1/2 teaspoon cinnamon, 
and allspice together into a large bowl. Add 
the orange zest and cornmeal; mix until combined. 
Set aside. 
2. In an electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment, 
beat the eggs and 1/4 cup granulated 
sugar until the mixture is pale yellow, about 5 minutes. 
Add the condensed milk, and beat well. Add 
the pumpkin and melted butter, and beat until combined. 
Add the reserved flour mixture, and mix until 
the dough holds together. Cover the dough with 
plastic wrap, and refrigerate overnight. 
3. Heat the vegetable oil in a large, deep pan over 
medium heat until a deep-fry thermometer reads 
365 degrees F. 
4. While the oil is heating, roll out the dough on a 
lightly floured surface to about 1/3 inch thick. Using 
a   doughnut cutter, cut out doughnuts, and 
set aside. Reroll the scraps of dough, and continue 
to cut out more doughnuts. Mix together the remaining 
1/2 teaspoon cinnamon and 1/4 cup sugar in 
a small bowl, and set aside. 
5. Add 4 doughnuts to the hot oil; fry until golden 
brown, about 11/2 minutes. Turn the doughnuts over; 
fry until golden brown, about 1 minute more. Transfer 
to several layers of paper towels to drain. Repeat 
until all the doughnuts have been fried. 
6. Roll half the warm doughnuts, 1 at a time, in cinnamon 
sugar to coat. Transfer to a serving platter. 
Dust the remaining doughnuts with confectioners' 
sugar. Transfer to the serving platter. Serve warm. 
yogurt-nut oat bread 

MAKES ONE 8-INCH LOAF 

To store, wrap the loaf tightly in plastic; refrigerate 
for up to 1 week, or freeze for up to 2 months. 

Cooking spray 
2 cups all-purpose flour 


3/4 cup whole-wheat flour 
11/2 teaspoons coarse salt 
1 teaspoon cream of tartar 

1 teaspoon baking soda 

1 teaspoon baking powder 

3/4 cup walnuts, toasted and chopped 
3/4 cup hulled sunflower seeds, toasted, 
plus 3 tablespoons for topping 
1/2 cup steel-cut oats 

1/2 cup oat or rice bran 
11/4 cups low-fat (1 percent) milk 

1 cup plain low-fat yogurt 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Coat an 8 x 4-inch loaf 
pan with cooking spray. Into a large bowl, sift together 
the flours, salt, cream of tartar, baking soda, 
and baking powder. Stir in the nuts, sunflower 
seeds, oats, and bran. In a separate bowl, whisk together 
the milk and yogurt, then stir into the flour 
mixture just until combined. 
2. Spoon the batter into the prepared pan, and 
smooth the top with the back of the spoon. Sprinkle 
the remaining 3 tablespoons sunflower seeds 
evenly over the top. 
3. Bake until golden on top and pulling away from 
the pan, about 1 hour 10 minutes. Remove from the 
oven; immediately invert onto a wire rack to remove 
the pan. Reinvert; let cool completely before slicing. 
BREADS 557 


sweet potato rolls 

MAKES 20 

You will need about 2 medium sweet potatoes to 
obtain 2 cups cooked flesh. We like the flavor of 
roasted potatoes best, but you could also use 
boiled or steamed potatoes. Before using, peel 
and discard the skins. 

1/4 cup warm water 

1 envelope active dry yeast 
(1 scant tablespoon) 


1 cup milk 
1/3 cup unsalted butter 


1/2 cup sugar 
11/2 tablespoons coarse salt 

1 teaspoon ground cardamom 

2 cups cooked sweet potatoes 
(about 2 medium) 


1 teaspoon fresh lemon juice 
1 large egg, lightly beaten 


7 cups sifted all-purpose flour 
Vegetable oil, for bowl 


Melted butter, for brushing 

1. Place the warm water in a small bowl, and sprinkle 
with the yeast. Let stand until the yeast is dissolved 
and mixture is foamy, about 7 minutes. 
2. In a small saucepan, heat the milk over medium 
heat just until it begins to steam and bubble around 
the sides. Remove from heat; add the butter, and stir 
until melted and combined. Stir in the sugar, salt, 
and cardamom. Let cool slightly. 
3. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Line a baking sheet 
with parchment paper; set aside. Combine the sweet 
potatoes and lemon juice in the bowl of an electric 
mixer fitted with the paddle attachment; beat until 
smooth, 2 to 3 minutes. Beat in the egg and milk 
and yeast mixtures until smooth. 
4. Switch to the dough hook attachment. Add the 
flour, 1 cup at a time, beating until a stiff dough 
forms. Continue kneading the dough on medium 
speed until smooth, about 8 minutes. The dough 
will still be slightly sticky. 
5. Transfer to a large oiled bowl. Cover with a clean 
kitchen towel, and let stand in a warm place to rise 
until the dough is doubled in bulk, about 1 hour. 
6. Punch down the dough, and knead again with 
your hands, just until smooth. Using a bench 
scraper or sharp knife, cut the dough into 20 equal 
pieces, and shape them into rolls. 
7. Place the rolls on the prepared baking sheet, 
about 2 inches apart; cover with a kitchen towel, 
and let rise again in a warm place until doubled in 
bulk, about 40 minutes. 
8. Using kitchen scissors or a sharp paring knife, 
snip an X in the top of each roll. Brush the rolls with 
melted butter. Bake until the tops of the rolls are 
golden, about 20 minutes, rotating the pan halfway 
through. Transfer to a wire rack; serve hot or at 
room temperature. 
cream biscuits 

MAKES 30 

White Lily flour is widely used throughout the 
South. Made with only soft winter wheat, it is 
finer, lighter, and whiter than other types of flour. 

21/2 cups White Lily all-purpose flour, 
plus more for the work surface 

1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon 
baking powder 


1/2 teaspoon salt 

2 cups heavy cream 

3 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted 

1. Preheat the oven to 450 degrees F. Whisk together the 
flour, baking powder, and salt in a bowl. Pour in the 
cream; stir with a wooden spoon until just combined. 
The dough will still be wet and tacky. 
2. Turn out the dough onto a well-floured work surface, 
and pat into a square about 1/2 inch thick. Let 
rest about 5 minutes. 
3. Using a   round biscuit cutter, cut out 24 
rounds. Gather together the scraps; pat into a 
square, and cut out more rounds. Place on a baking 
sheet, and bake until golden on the tops, 12 to 14 
minutes. Remove from the oven; immediately brush 
the tops with butter. Transfer to a wire rack to cool. 
Serve warm or at room temperature. 
558 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


MAKING MUFFINS, STEP BY STEP 

1. For best results, bring the 2. Whisk together the dry ingre4. 
With a rubber spatula, fold 
milk, eggs, and butter to room dients in one bowl and the wet the wet mixture into the dry one, 
temperature. Take these ingreingredients 
in another. with as few strokes as possible. 
dients out of the refrigerator before 
you start, letting them 
warm up as you measure the dry 
ingredients. 
3. Make a well in the center of 
the dry ingredients; pour in the 
wet ingredients. 
5. Fill buttered muffin tins about 
three-quarters of the way with 
batter. This leaves enough room 
for a crumb topping. 

breakfast muffins 

MAKES 12 

10 tablespoons (11/4 sticks) unsalted butter, 
melted, plus more for the pan 
13/4 cups all-purpose flour 
1 tablespoon baking powder 
11/4 teaspoons ground cinnamon 
1/4 teaspoon salt 
1/2 vanilla bean, split and scraped 
2/3 cup sugar 
2/3 cup milk, room temperature 

streusel 

MAKES ENOUGH FOR 12 STANDARD MUFFINS 

5 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted 
2/3 cup all-purpose flour 
2/3 cup confectioners' sugar 
1/4 teaspoon ground cinnamon 


Pinch of salt 

Put all ingredients in a medium bowl; mix with your 
fingers until the mixture is moist and crumbly. 

1 large egg, room temperature 

11/4 cups fruit, such as blueberries, 
raspberries, strawberries, or peaches 

Streusel (recipe follows) 

1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Butter a standard muffin 
tin. Combine the flour, baking powder, cinnamon, 
and salt in a large bowl; whisk to combine. 
2. In a medium bowl, combine the butter, vanilla 
bean scrapings, sugar, milk, and egg; whisk to combine. 
Fold the butter mixture and fruit into the flour 
mixture; use no more than 10 strokes. 
3. Spoon 1/4 cup batter into each prepared cup; press 
2 tablespoons streusel on top of each. Bake until 
the tops are golden, 15 to 17 minutes. Remove from 
the oven; let cool in the pan 15 to 20 minutes before 
transferring to a wire rack. Serve warm or at room 
temperature. 
MUFFIN VARIATIONS 

When you want a change from plain muffins, 
add fresh fruit or nuts (see suggestions 
below). You can add one or a combination of 
mix-ins, as long as the total volume does not 
exceed 11/4 cups. Good combinations include 
peach and pecan, blueberry and lemon zest, 
raspberry and walnut, and strawberry and 
orange zest. 

3/4 cup walnut pieces 
3/4 cup pecan halves 
11/4 cups sliced strawberries 
(about   pieces) 
11/4 cups sliced peaches 

(about   pieces) 
11/4 cups blueberries 
11/4 cups raspberries 
2 tablespoons fresh lemon zest 
2 tablespoons fresh orange zest 
2 tablespoons poppy seeds 

BREADS 559 


applesauce muffins 

MAKES 18 

2 cups all-purpose flour 

2 teaspoons ground cinnamon 

1 teaspoon baking soda 

3/4 teaspoon salt 
1/2 teaspoon freshly ground nutmeg 
1/8 teaspoon ground cloves 
8 ounces (2 sticks) unsalted butter, softened 
1 cup granulated sugar 


11/2 cups packed light brown sugar 
4 large eggs 

Apple Cider Applesauce (recipe follows) 

or 11/2 cups store-bought applesauce 

1 cup toasted pecans, chopped 

1 package (8 ounces) cream cheese, 
room temperature 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Line a standard 12-cup 
muffin tin and a 6-cup tin with paper liners. Sift the 
flour, cinnamon, baking soda, salt, nutmeg, and 
cloves together into a medium bowl. Set aside. 
2. Put 8 tablespoons (1 stick) butter, the granulated 
sugar, and 1/2 cup brown sugar in the bowl of an electric 
mixer fitted with the paddle attachment. Cream 
on medium speed until smooth, about 3 minutes. 
Mix in the eggs, 1 at a time. On low speed, mix in 
the applesauce and then the flour mixture. Stir in 
the nuts by hand. 
3. Divide the batter among the muffin cups, filling 
each about three-quarters full. Bake until a tester inserted 
in the centers comes out clean, 18 to 20 minutes. 
Let cool completely in the tins on a wire rack. 
4. Meanwhile, in the clean bowl of the electric 
mixer, mix the cream cheese with the remaining 8 
tablespoons (1 stick) butter and 1 cup brown sugar 
on medium speed until smooth. Spread the cream 
cheese frosting on the muffins. The muffins can be 
refrigerated in airtight containers up to 2 days. 
apple cider applesauce 

MAKES 11/2 CUPS 

1 pound juicy apples, such as McIntosh, 
peeled, cored, and quartered 


3/4 cup apple cider 
1 tablespoon sugar, plus more if needed 
Pinch of salt 

1. Bring the apples and cider to a boil in a medium 
saucepan over medium-high heat. Cover the pan; 
reduce heat. Simmer until the apples are very soft, 
about 12 minutes. Stir in the sugar and salt. 
2. Cook (uncovered) over medium-low heat until 
the apples have broken down and most of the liquid 
is evaporated, about 15 minutes. Let cool 
slightly. 
3. Puree in a food processor until smooth. Add more 
sugar, if desired. Store in an airtight container up 
to 2 days. 
health muffins 

MAKES 12 

If you prefer, you can bake these muffins in a standard 
muffin tin; spoon 1/4 cup batter into each cup. 

Nonstick cooking spray (optional) 

1 cup whole-wheat flour 
1 cup wheat bran 


3 tablespoons flaxseed, ground, 
plus more for garnish 


11/4 teaspoons baking powder 

11/4 teaspoons baking soda 

3/4 teaspoon ground nutmeg 
1/2 teaspoon salt 
5 carrots, finely grated 


10 ounces (about 15) dried figs, sliced 
into eights 


2/3 cup applesauce 
2/3 cup honey 


5 large eggs, lightly beaten 
1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 


560 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Lightly coat a 2/3-cup 
muffin tin with cooking spray, or line with paper 
cups; set aside. 
2. Combine the flour, bran, flaxseed, baking powder, 
baking soda, nutmeg, and salt in a large bowl; 
whisk to combine. Add the carrots, figs, applesauce, 
honey, eggs, and vanilla. Using a rubber spatula, 
stir until just combined. 
3. Spoon 1/2 cup batter into each prepared cup, and 
bake until the tops are golden, 15 to 17 minutes. Remove 
from the oven; let cool in the pan 12 to 15 minutes 
before transferring to a wire rack. Serve warm 
or at room temperature. 
brown sugar cornbread 

MAKES TWO 9 x 4  LOAVES 

This cornbread-made slightly sweet with the addition 
of dark brown sugar-mixes very easily: 
Just whisk together the dry ingredients; melt the 
butter and sugar; and whisk in cold milk to cool 
the liquid. Next, whisk in the eggs, then stir the 
brown sugar mixture into the cornmeal, scrape 
the batter into the pan, and bake. 

1 cup (2 sticks) unsalted butter, 
plus more for the pans 
22/3 cups yellow cornmeal 

2 cups all-purpose flour 
21/2 tablespoons baking powder 
1 teaspoon salt 

3/4 cup packed dark-brown sugar 
2 cups milk 
4 large eggs, beaten 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F with a rack in the middle. 
Butter 2 9 x 4  loaf pans; set aside. 
2. In a large bowl, whisk together the yellow cornmeal, 
flour, baking powder, and salt. 
3. Heat the butter and brown sugar in a small 
saucepan over medium-low heat just until melted, 
and whisk until the mixture is smooth. Remove 
from heat; whisk in the milk and then the eggs. Pour 
into the dry mixture, stirring just until blended, and 
divide evenly between the prepared pans, smoothing 
the tops. 
4. Bake until the loaves are golden and a cake tester 
inserted in the centers comes out clean, about 30 
minutes. Turn the loaves out onto racks to cool. 
Serve warm or at room temperature. 
orange breakfast biscuits 

MAKES 12 

21/2 cups all-purpose flour, plus more 
for dusting 
1/3 cup plus 1 tablespoon sugar 
2 tablespoons finely grated orange zest 

11/2 teaspoons baking powder 
11/4 teaspoons coarse salt 

1/4 teaspoon baking soda 
8 tablespoons (1 stick) cold unsalted 
butter, cut into small pieces 
11/4 cups buttermilk 

1. Line a baking sheet with parchment paper; lightly 
dust with flour. Set aside. Put 1/3 cup sugar and the 
zest in the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the 
paddle attachment. Mix, scraping down the sides 
of the bowl as needed, until combined, about 3 minutes. 
Set aside. 
2. Whisk together the flour, baking powder, salt, 
baking soda, and remaining tablespoon sugar in a 
medium bowl. Using a pastry blender or 2 knives, 
blend in the butter until the mixture resembles 
coarse meal. Add the buttermilk; stir with a wooden 
spoon just until a sticky dough forms. 
3. Turn out the dough onto a lightly floured work 
surface. Pat the dough together, and press into an 
8 x 11 x   rectangle. Sprinkle 2 tablespoons 
sugar mixture on top. Using a bench scraper or 
spatula to lift the dough, fold the rectangle into 
thirds (as you would a letter). 
4. Give the dough a quarter-turn. Roll out into an 
8 x 11 x   rectangle. Sprinkle 2 tablespoons 
sugar mixture evenly on top. Fold into thirds. Transfer 
the dough to prepared baking sheet. Tightly 
cover with plastic wrap. Refrigerate 30 minutes. 
5. Return the dough to the floured work surface. 
Roll out again into an 8 x 11 x   rectangle. 
BREADS 561 


Sprinkle 2 tablespoons sugar mixture on top. Fold 
into thirds. Sprinkle the remaining sugar mixture 
evenly on top. 

6. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Using a 2  biscuit 
or cookie cutter, cut rounds from the dough 
(still folded); transfer to a baking sheet. Tightly 
cover with plastic wrap. Refrigerate 30 minutes. 
7. Bake until the biscuits are just browned, 20 to 25 
minutes. Transfer biscuits to a wire rack. Serve warm. 
buttermilk-onion 
pull-apart rolls 

MAKES ABOUT 12 

11 tablespoons (13/8 sticks) unsalted butter, 
softened, plus more for the bowl, plus 5 
tablespoons melted 


1 envelope (1/4 ounce) active dry yeast 
1 tablespoon sugar 


2 tablespoon warm water (105 degrees  to 110 degrees F) 

3/4 cup buttermilk 
1 large egg, lightly beaten 

23/4 cups plus 2 tablespoons all-purpose flour, 
plus more for the surface and pin 

2 teaspoons salt 

2 pounds sweet onions, such as Rio (11/2 
pounds cut into   slices, 1/2 pound 
finely chopped) 


1/8 teaspoon freshly grated nutmeg 

1. Butter a 9-inch cake pan using 1 tablespoon softened 
butter. Butter a large bowl; set aside. Stir 
together the yeast, sugar, and warm water in a 
small bowl; let the mixture stand until foamy, about 
5 minutes. Stir until dissolved. Stir in the buttermilk 
and egg. 
2. Mix 23/4 cups flour and 11/2 teaspoons salt in the 
bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the dough hook. 
Make a well in the center. Pour in the buttermilk 
mixture; mix to combine. Add 6 tablespoons softened 
butter; mix on medium-high speed until a soft 
dough forms, about 10 minutes. 
3. Scrape the dough onto a lightly floured work surface; 
sprinkle with the remaining 2 tablespoons 
flour. Knead the dough until smooth, about 5 minutes. 
Transfer to the buttered bowl. Cover the dough 
with a clean kitchen towel; let rise in a warm place 
until doubled in bulk, about 1 hour. 

4. Melt the remaining 4 tablespoons softened butter 
in a large saucepan over medium-high heat. Add 
the onions; raise heat to high, and cook, stirring 
often, until soft, about 5 minutes. Reduce heat to 
medium; cook, stirring, until golden brown, about 
30 minutes. Stir in the nutmeg. Season with 1/2 teaspoon 
salt. Let cool. 
5. Punch down the dough, and turn out onto a 
lightly floured work surface. With a lightly floured 
rolling pin, roll the dough into a 17 x 10-inch rectangle, 
and brush with 3 tablespoons melted butter. 
Spread the onions evenly over the dough. 
Starting on 1 long side, roll the dough into a log. 
Press the seam to seal. 
6. Cut into about 12 slices, about 11/4 inches thick 
each. Arrange the slices, cut sides up, in the buttered 
pan, and brush with remaining 2 tablespoons 
melted butter. Cover loosely with plastic wrap. Let 
rise in a warm place until doubled in bulk, about 50 
minutes. 
7. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Bake the rolls until 
golden brown, about 35 minutes. Immediately invert 
the rolls onto a wire rack. Serve warm. 
buttery crescent rolls 

MAKES 24 

3/4 cup (11/2 sticks) unsalted butter, softened, 
plus more for the bowl and plastic wrap, 
plus 2 tablespoons melted 
11/4 cups whole milk 

1/4 cup vegetable shortening 
1/4 cup plus 1 tablespoon sugar 


21/2 teaspoons salt 
1 envelope (1/4 ounce) active dry yeast 

1/4 cup water (105 degrees  to 110 degrees F) 
2 large eggs, lightly beaten 


51/2 cups all-purpose flour, plus more 
for the work surface 

1. Line 2 baking sheets with parchment paper; set 
aside. Butter a large bowl; set aside. Put the milk, 
shortening, sugar, softened butter, and salt in a 
562 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


medium saucepan. Cook over medium heat, stirring 
constantly, until the sugar has dissolved. Let 
cool completely. 

2. Put the yeast and warm water in the bowl of an 
electric mixer fitted with the dough hook. Let stand 
until foamy, about 5 minutes. Mix in the milk mixture 
on medium speed until combined; mix in the 
eggs. Reduce speed to low, and gradually mix in the 
flour. Raise speed to medium-high; mix until a soft 
dough forms, about 12 minutes. 
3. Turn out the dough onto a lightly floured work 
surface. Knead until smooth, about 5 minutes, then 
transfer to the buttered bowl. Cover with a clean 
kitchen towel; set in a warm place to rise until doubled 
in bulk, about 1 hour. 
4. Roll the dough into a 13 x 20-inch rectangle. Trim 
the edges to be straight. Cut the dough in half lengthwise; 
cut both strips into 12 triangles (about 3 inches 
wide at each base). Gently stretch each to 2 to 3 
inches long. Starting at the widest end, gently roll up. 
Space 1 inch apart on prepared baking sheets, 
pointed ends down. Cover loosely with buttered plastic 
wrap; let rise until doubled in bulk, about 1 hour. 
5. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Brush the rolls with 
the melted butter. Bake until golden, about 20 minutes. 
Let cool on a wire rack 5 minutes. Serve warm. 
olive rolls 

MAKES 12 

1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil, plus more for 
the parchment, bowl, and plastic wrap 


1 envelope (1/4 ounce) active dry yeast 
1 cup warm water (105 degrees  to 110 degrees F) 


3 to 4 cups all-purpose flour, plus more 
for the work surface 


1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 

1 cup oil-cured black olives, pitted 
and cut into   pieces 


1/2 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes 

1. Line a baking sheet with parchment paper. Brush 
the parchment with oil; set aside. Oil a large bowl; 
set aside. Sprinkle the yeast over the warm water in 
a small bowl. Let stand until foamy, about 5 minutes. 
Stir until dissolved. 
2. Put 3 cups flour and the salt in the bowl of an 
electric mixer fitted with the dough hook. Add the 
yeast mixture and oil; mix on medium speed until 
a soft dough forms, adding more flour if needed. 
Add the olives and red pepper flakes; mix until fully 
combined, about 15 minutes. 
3. Turn out the dough onto a lightly floured work 
surface. Knead until smooth and the olives are set 
firmly in the dough, about 15 minutes. Transfer to 
the oiled bowl. Cover loosely with a clean kitchen 
towel, and let rise in a warm place until doubled in 
bulk, about 1 hour. 
4. Turn out the dough onto a lightly floured work 
surface; gently flatten. Using a butter knife, cut the 
dough into 12 equal pieces. Roll each into a cylinder, 
and transfer to the prepared baking sheet. 
Cover with oiled plastic wrap. Let rise in a warm 
place until doubled in bulk, about 1 hour. 
5. Preheat the oven to 450 degrees  F. Bake the rolls until 
the tops are crisp and dark brown, about 15 minutes. 
Serve warm or at room temperature. 
sour cream-thyme rolls 

MAKES 12 

1/2 cup (1 stick) cold unsalted butter, cut 
into small pieces, plus 2 tablespoons 
melted, plus more for the muffin tin and 
plastic wrap 


1 envelope (1/4 ounce) active dry yeast 

1 cup warm water (105 degrees  to 110 degrees F) 

2 tablespoons sugar 

2 cups cake flour (not self-rising) 

2 cups all-purpose flour 

11/2 teaspoons salt 

11/2 cups sour cream 
2 tablespoons fresh thyme leaves 

1. Lightly butter a standard 12-cup muffin tin, and 
set aside. Stir together the yeast, warm water, and 
sugar in a small bowl, and let stand until foamy, 
about 5 minutes. Stir until the yeast dissolves. 
2. Whisk together the flours and salt in a large bowl. 
Using a pastry blender, cut in the butter pieces until 
mixture resembles coarse meal. Stir in the yeast 
BREADS 563 


mixture. Stir in the sour cream and thyme leaves 
until combined. 

3. Spoon heaping 1/3 cup dough into each cup of the 
muffin tin. Cover with buttered plastic wrap; let rise 
in a warm place until doubled in size, about 1 hour. 
4. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Bake the rolls 10 minutes. 
Remove from the oven, and lightly brush with 
2 tablespoons melted butter. Bake until golden 
brown, 16 to 18 minutes. Immediately invert and unmold 
rolls onto a wire rack. Serve warm. 
whole-grain morning loaf 

MAKES ONE 10-INCH LOAF 

Vegetable oil cooking spray 

1 large apple, such as McIntosh, peeled and 
coarsely grated 

3/4 cup stone-ground whole-wheat flour 
1/2 cup unbleached all-purpose flour 
1 cup coarse wheat bran 


1/4 cup wheat germ 
11/2 teaspoons baking soda 

1/2 teaspoon ground nutmeg 
1/2 teaspoon ground ginger 


1/2 teaspoon salt 
11/4 cups plain nonfat yogurt 

1/3 cup applesauce 
1/3 cup honey 


2 large eggs, lightly beaten 

3/4 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 
1/2 cup dried dates, chopped 
1/2 cup walnuts, toasted and chopped 


41/2 teaspoons whole brown flaxseed 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Coat a 10 x   loaf 
pan with cooking spray. Wrap the apple in paper 
towels; squeeze out liquid. 
2. Whisk together the flours, wheat bran, wheat 
germ, baking soda, spices, and salt. 
3. Stir together the apple, yogurt, applesauce, honey, 
eggs, and vanilla with a rubber spatula in a large 
bowl. Fold in the flour mixture, then fold in the dates 
and nuts. Pour into the prepared pan. Sprinkle with 
the flaxseed. 
4. Bake until a cake tester comes out clean, 50 to 
55 minutes. Let cool in the pan on a wire rack 
15 minutes. Unmold onto rack. Serve warm or at 
room temperature. 
whole wheat-rye rolls 

MAKES 12 

6 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted, plus 
more for the bowl and plastic wrap 


1 envelope (1/4 ounce) active dry yeast 
1 cup warm water (105 degrees  to 110 degrees F) 


1 tablespoon sugar 
1 large egg, lightly beaten 


2 teaspoons salt 
11/4 cups rye flour 

11/2 cups whole-wheat flour 

3/4 cup all-purpose flour, plus more 
for the work surface 
2 tablespoons caraway seeds 

Sea salt, for sprinkling 

1. Line a baking sheet with parchment paper; set 
aside. Butter a large bowl; set aside. Put the yeast, 
warm water, sugar, egg, and 3 tablespoons butter in 
the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the dough 
hook. Mix on medium speed 1 minute. 
2. Reduce mixer speed to low. Mix in the salt, flours, 
and caraway seeds. Raise speed to medium-high, 
and beat until the dough comes together, about 10 
minutes. Turn out the dough onto a lightly floured 
work surface. Knead until smooth, 15 to 20 minutes, 
then transfer to the buttered bowl. Cover the dough 
with a clean kitchen towel, and let rise in a warm 
place until doubled in bulk, about 1 hour. 
3. Using a butter knife, cut the dough into 12 equal 
pieces. Roll into balls, and space 11/2 inches apart on 
the prepared baking sheet. Cover the dough with 
buttered plastic wrap. Let rise in a warm place until 
doubled in bulk, about 1 hour. 
4. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Using a sharp knife, 
cut an X in the top of each roll. Bake the rolls until 
golden brown, about 35 minutes. Transfer the rolls 
to a wire rack set over a baking sheet, and brush 
with the remaining 3 tablespoons butter. Sprinkle 
the tops with sea salt. 
564 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


currant scones 

MAKES 12 TO 16 

We used sanding sugar on the tops; granulated 
sugar works just as well. The scones are best eaten 
the day they are made, but they will keep up to 2 days 
in an airtight container at room temperature. This 
recipe was developed by Emily Donahue for Rosey's 
Coffee and Tea in Hanover, New Hampshire. 

4 cups all-purpose flour, plus more for the 
work surface 


2 tablespoons granulated sugar 

2 tablespoons baking powder 
1 teaspoon baking soda 


11/2 teaspoons salt 

1 cup (2 sticks) cold unsalted butter, cut 
into small pieces, plus more for serving 


11/4 cups buttermilk 
1 cup currants 

1 large egg, lightly beaten 
1/4 cup sanding sugar 


Preserves, for serving 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Line a baking sheet 
with parchment paper; set aside. In a large bowl, 
whisk together the flour, granulated sugar, baking 
powder, baking soda, and salt. 
2. Using a pastry cutter or 2 forks, cut the butter 
into the flour mixture until it resembles coarse meal. 
Add the buttermilk and currants; stir to combine. 
3. On a lightly floured surface, roll out the dough about 
1 inch thick. Using a 2  biscuit cutter, cut out 
as many rounds as possible, and place on the prepared 
baking sheet. Reroll the scraps; continue cutting. 
4. Lightly brush the top of each scone with beaten 
egg; sprinkle with sanding sugar. Bake until the biscuits 
are golden, 20 to 25 minutes. Transfer to a wire 
rack. Serve with butter and preserves on the side. 
dried apricot and sage scones 

MAKES 8 

When baked, these scones can be frozen in an 
airtight container for up to 1 month. 

2 cups all-purpose flour, plus 
more for dusting 


1/4 cup granulated sugar 
1 tablespoon baking powder 


3/4 teaspoon fine salt 
5 tablespoons cold unsalted butter, 
cut into small pieces 


1 cup chopped dried apricots 
(about 4 ounces) 


2 tablespoons plus 1 teaspoon finely 
chopped fresh sage 


1 cup heavy cream, plus more for brushing 

Sanding sugar, for sprinkling 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Place the flour, granulated 
sugar, baking powder, and salt in a large 
 

BREADS 565 


bowl. Work in the butter with your fingertips or a 
pastry blender until the mixture resembles coarse 
meal. Stir in the dried apricots and sage. Add the 
cream; gather the mixture together with your hands 
until it starts to hold together. 

2. Turn out the mixture onto a lightly floured work 
surface. Quickly bring the dough together; pat into 
an 8-inch circle 1 inch thick. Smooth the top with a 
rolling pin. Cut into 8 wedges with a bench scraper 
(see below). 
3. Arrange the wedges on a parchment-lined baking 
sheet. Brush the tops with cream, then sprinkle 
generously with sanding sugar. Bake until scones 
are cooked through and golden brown, about 30 
minutes. Immediately transfer the scones to a wire 
rack; let cool at least 10 minutes. Serve warm or at 
room temperature. 
whole-wheat oat bread 

MAKES ONE 7  ROUND LOAF; 

SERVES 8 

11/2 cups plus 2 tablespoons simmering water 

11/2 cups plus 1 tablespoon old-
fashioned rolled oats 

1/4 cup unsulfured molasses 

11/2 cups bread flour, plus more for dusting 

11/2 cups whole-wheat flour 

1/4 cup powdered nonfat dry milk 

1 envelope active dry yeast 
(1 scant tablespoon) 


3/4 teaspoon salt 
1 tablespoon vegetable oil 
1 large egg white, lightly beaten 

1. Pour the water over 1 cup oats in a medium bowl. 
Stir in the molasses; let stand until mixture registers 
115 degrees F on an instant-read thermometer, about 
10 minutes. 
2. Coarsely grind 1/2 cup oats in a food processor. 
Transfer to a separate medium bowl; add the flours 
and powdered milk. 
3. Sprinkle the molasses mixture with yeast. Stir 
in 1 cup flour mixture, then the salt. Gradually stir 
in the remaining flour mixture, 1 cup at a time. 
4. Turn the dough out onto a lightly floured work 
surface. Knead until smooth and no longer sticky, 
5 to 10 minutes. 
5. Oil a medium bowl with 1 teaspoon oil. Transfer 
the dough to the bowl; turn to coat. Loosely cover 
with plastic wrap, and let the dough rise in a warm 
spot until doubled in bulk, 1 to 11/4 hours. 
6. Brush a heavy-duty baking sheet with 1 teaspoon 
oil; set aside. Punch down the dough. Transfer to a 
lightly floured work surface. Knead the dough once 
or twice. Flatten into a 9-inch circle. 
7. Pull the edges of the dough up and in toward the 
center; pinch to seal. Turn the dough over. Pull 
down on the dough with cupped hands to stretch 
the top; pinch the edges at the bottom. Wrap your 
hands around the sides of the dough; rotate to 
shape into a tight ball, 51/2 inches in diameter and 
33/4 inches high. Place on the oiled baking sheet, 
seam side down. 
8. Brush plastic wrap with the remaining teaspoon 
oil; cover the dough. Let rise until doubled in bulk, 
45 minutes to 1 hour. 
9. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Score an X in the top 
of the dough. Brush with egg white; sprinkle with the 
remaining tablespoon oats. Bake 10 minutes. Reduce 
oven temperature to 350 degrees F. Bake until dark golden 
brown and the bottom sounds hollow when tapped, 
40 to 45 minutes. Let cool completely on a wire rack. 
socca 

MAKES 8 WEDGES 

21/2 cups chickpea flour 

1/2 cup extra-virgin olive oil, plus more 
for the skillet 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
1 tablespoon chopped fresh rosemary 


1. Heat the broiler with the rack 8 inches from the 
heat source. Stir together the flour, 2 cups water, the 
oil, and 1 tablespoon salt in a medium bowl. 
2. Oil a 1  cast-iron skillet; pour in the batter. 
Broil until golden brown, 3 to 4 minutes. Reduce 
oven to 400 degrees  F; bake until set, about 6 minutes. 
Sprinkle with the rosemary; season with salt and 
pepper. Cut into 8 wedges, and serve. 
566 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


cranberry bran muffins 

MAKES 12 

Store in an airtight container at room temperature 
for up to 3 days, or freeze for up to 1 month. 

2 cups all-purpose flour 

11/2 cups wheat bran 
11/2 teaspoons baking powder 

3/4 teaspoon fine salt 
1/4 teaspoon baking soda 
11/2 cups packed dark-brown sugar 
11/4 cups plus 2 tablespoons buttermilk 

11 tablespoons (13/8 sticks) unsalted 
butter, melted and cooled 


2 large eggs 
1 tablespoon finely grated orange zest 


2 teaspoons pure vanilla extract 
11/2 cups fresh or frozen cranberries 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Line a 12-cup standard 
muffin tin with paper liners; set aside. Place the flour, 
bran, baking powder, salt, and baking soda in a large 
bowl. Stir in the sugar, and set aside. 
2. Whisk together the buttermilk, butter, eggs, zest, 
and vanilla in a bowl. Add the flour mixture; stir until 
just combined. Stir in the cranberries. 
3. Divide the batter among the lined muffin cups. 
Bake until cooked through and golden brown, about 
30 minutes. Transfer to a wire rack to cool slightly. 
Turn out; serve warm or at room temperature. 
banana bread with 
walnuts and flaxseed 

MAKES 1 LOAF 

You can store the banana bread, wrapped well in 
plastic wrap, at room temperature up to 4 days. 

2 tablespoons unsalted butter, 
melted, plus 1 teaspoon unsalted butter, 
softened, for the pan 


1/2 cup whole-wheat flour 

3/4 cup all-purpose flour 
1/4 cup ground golden flaxseed 
(from about 2 tablespoons whole) 


3/4 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/2 teaspoon baking powder 
1/2 teaspoon baking soda 


1 large egg, plus 1 large egg white 
1/2 cup light-brown sugar 


11/2 teaspoons pure vanilla extract 

3/4 cup mashed very ripe bananas 
(about 2 medium bananas) 
1/2 cup walnuts (about 13/4 ounces), 
toasted and coarsely chopped 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Butter a 9 x 5 x   
loaf pan, and set aside. Whisk together the flours, 
flaxseed, salt, baking powder, and baking soda in 
a medium bowl, and set aside. 
2. Put the egg and egg white in the bowl of an electric 
mixer fitted with the paddle attachment, and 
mix on medium-low speed until well combined, 
about 2 minutes. Add the melted butter, sugar, 
vanilla, and bananas, and mix until combined. Add 
the reserved flour mixture, and mix on low speed 
until well incorporated, about 10 seconds. Stir in 
the walnuts. 
3. Pour the batter into the buttered pan. Bake until 
golden brown and a cake tester inserted into the 
center comes out clean, about 35 minutes. Let cool 
slightly in the pan on a wire rack. Unmold onto rack, 
and let cool completely. 
BREADS 567 


tomato focaccia 

MAKES 8 PIECES 

If you don't have a mixer, knead the dough by 
hand on a lightly floured surface until smooth, 
about 10 minutes. 

2 tablespoons plus 1/2 teaspoon active 
dry yeast (from 2 envelopes) 


41/2 teaspoons sugar 

21/3 cups warm water (105 degrees  to 110 degrees F) 

51/2 teaspoons extra-virgin olive oil, 
plus more for the bowl 

61/4 cups plus 3 tablespoons all-purpose flour 
Coarse salt 

1 cup grape tomatoes, halved lengthwise 
1 tablespoon fresh rosemary 


1. Stir together the yeast, sugar, and warm water in 
the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle 
attachment. Let stand until foamy, about 5 minutes. 
2. Stir in 41/2 teaspoons oil. Add the flour and 41/2 
teaspoons salt; mix on medium-low speed until 
combined. Switch to the dough hook; knead on 
medium speed until smooth, 5 to 7 minutes. 
3. Transfer the dough to a lightly oiled large bowl. 
Loosely cover with plastic wrap; let the dough rise 
in a warm, draft-free spot until doubled in bulk, 
about 20 minutes. 
4. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Generously oil a 12 x 
17-inch rimmed baking sheet. Spread out the dough 
to fill the sheet, stretching it and working it into the 
corners. Press in the tomatoes; sprinkle with the 
rosemary. Loosely cover with oiled plastic wrap; let 
rest 30 minutes. 
5. Drizzle the dough with the remaining teaspoon 
oil, and sprinkle with salt. Bake 5 minutes. Rotate 
the sheet; bake until golden, about 15 minutes more. 
6. Let cool in the sheet; cut into 8 rectangles. If not 
serving that day, wrap the pieces in plastic wrap 
and foil; freeze up to 1 month. 
challah 

MAKES 1 LARGE LOAF 

All ingredients except the milk and water should 
be at room temperature. This bread can be stored 
in a resealable plastic bag at room temperature 
for up to 2 days. 

2 tablespoons unsalted butter, softened, 
plus more for bowl, plus 2 tablespoons, 
melted and cooled, for brushing 


31/2 cups unbleached bread flour, plus 
more for dusting 

1/2 cup water, warmed to 100 degrees F 

1/3 cup sugar 
1/4 cup whole milk, warmed to 100 degrees F 


2 large eggs, lightly beaten, plus 1 large 
egg, lightly beaten, for egg wash 


3 large egg yolks, lightly beaten 

2 teaspoons coarse salt 
2 teaspoons active dry yeast 


1. Butter a large bowl; set aside. Stir all remaining 
ingredients, except the egg for the egg wash and 
the butter for brushing, in a large bowl until well 
combined. Turn out the dough onto a lightly floured 
work surface; knead the dough, adding flour if 
needed, until smooth and pliable, about 15 minutes. 
2. Transfer the dough to the buttered bowl; brush 
the top with 1 tablespoon melted butter. Loosely 
cover with plastic wrap. Let rise in a warm place 
until almost doubled in bulk, about 11/2 hours. 
3. Turn out the dough onto a lightly floured work 
surface; knead 5 minutes, then return to the bowl. 
Brush the top with the remaining tablespoon 
melted butter, and loosely cover with plastic wrap. 
Let the dough rise again until doubled in bulk, 
about 1 hour more. 
4. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Divide the dough into 
3 equal pieces. Roll each piece into a ball, and 
loosely cover each ball with buttered plastic wrap. 
Let rest 20 minutes. 
568 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


5. Roll each ball into a 1 -long log, leaving the 
middle a little thicker than the ends. Lay the logs 
side by side lengthwise; pinch together the ends 
farthest from you, then tightly braid the strands, 
pulling them as you go. Tuck the ends of the braid 
underneath. Transfer to a buttered baking sheet, 
and loosely cover with buttered plastic wrap. Let 
rise until almost doubled in bulk, about 45 minutes. 
6. Brush the dough lightly with egg wash. Bake until 
golden brown and firm and an instant-read thermometer 
inserted into the bottom registers 180 degrees F 
and comes out clean, 35 to 40 minutes. If the challah 
browns too quickly, loosely tent with foil. Immediately 
transfer to a wire rack; let cool at least 45 
minutes before serving. 
cornbread muffins 

MAKES 12 

5 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted, plus 
more for the muffin tin 
1 cup stone-ground yellow cornmeal 
1 cup all-purpose flour 
1/4 cup confectioners' sugar 
1/4 cup granulated sugar 
1/2 teaspoon baking powder 
1 teaspoon baking soda 
1 teaspoon salt 
1/2 vanilla bean, split lengthwise 
2 large eggs 
11/2 cups buttermilk 

 

BREADS 569 


1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Brush a 12-cup standard 
muffin tin with melted butter; set aside. In a 
large bowl, whisk together the cornmeal, flour, sugars, 
baking powder, baking soda, and salt. 
2. In a small bowl, scrape in the vanilla seeds; add 
the eggs and buttermilk, and whisk to combine. 
Pour over the flour mixture. Add the 5 tablespoons 
butter, and stir until blended, using as few strokes 
as possible. 
3. Spoon the batter into the prepared tin, filling each 
cup three-quarters full. Bake until golden and firm 
to the touch, 17 to 20 minutes. Serve warm. 
irish soda bread 

MAKES ONE 7-INCH ROUND LOAF 

Graham flour is coarser than regular whole-wheat 
flour, which also works. If you use the latter, substitute 
1/2 cup wheat bran for 1/2 cup all-purpose flour. 

3 cups all-purpose flour, plus more 
for dusting 


1 cup whole-wheat graham flour 
21/2 teaspoons coarse salt 

1 teaspoon baking soda 
1 teaspoon baking powder 


4 tablespoons cold unsalted butter, 
cut into small pieces 


12/3 cups buttermilk 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Line a baking sheet 
with parchment paper; set aside. Whisk together 
the flours, salt, baking soda, and baking powder in 
a large bowl. With a pastry blender or your fingertips, 
blend in the butter until it resembles small 
peas. Add the buttermilk all at once; stir with a fork 
until the mixture holds together. 
2. In the bowl, pat the dough into a dome-shaped 
loaf about 7 inches in diameter. Lift out the dough; 
transfer to the lined sheet. 
3. Lightly dust the top of the loaf with flour. Cut a 
 -deep cross in the top, reaching almost all 
the way to the edges. Bake, rotating the sheet 
halfway through, until deep golden brown and a 
cake tester inserted into the center comes out clean, 
about 1 hour and 20 minutes. Let cool on a wire rack. 
buttercup squash tea bread 

MAKES ONE 9-INCH LOAF 

1/2 cup (1 stick) unsalted butter, melted, plus 
more for the pan, room temperature 


11/2 cups all-purpose flour, plus more 
for the pan 

1 teaspoon baking soda 

1/2 teaspoon ground cinnamon 

1/2 teaspoon ground nutmeg 

1/2 teaspoon ground ginger 

1/8 teaspoon ground cloves 

1/4 teaspoon salt 

1 cup packed light-brown sugar 

2 large eggs 

1 cup Roasted Squash Puree made 

with buttercup squash (recipe follows) 

1/2 cup coarsely chopped pecans 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees  F. Butter and flour a 
9 x 5 x   loaf pan, and set aside. Into a large 
bowl, sift together the flour, baking soda, spices, 
and salt; set aside. 
2. In a medium bowl, whisk together the sugar, 
eggs, squash puree, melted butter, and 1/4 cup water. 
Fold the squash mixture into the flour mixture. Stir 
in the pecans. 
3. Pour the batter into the prepared loaf pan, and 
bake until a cake tester inserted in the center comes 
out clean, about 1 hour. Turn the bread out onto a 
wire rack, and let cool completely. 
570 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


roasted squash puree 

MAKES ABOUT 21/4 CUPS 

3 pounds squash, such as butternut, 
orange Hokkaido, or buttercup, halved 
and seeded 


Canola oil, for baking sheet 

1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees  F. Place the squash 
halves, skin side up, on an oiled rimmed baking 
sheet. Bake until fork-tender, about 11/4 hours. Remove 
from the oven. Turn over; let stand until cool 
enough to handle. 
2. Scoop the flesh into a food processor, and discard 
the skin. Puree until smooth. Refrigerate 
squash puree in an airtight container up to 4 days 
or store in the freezer up to 1 month. 
pumpkin molasses tea bread 

MAKES ONE 9-INCH LOAF 

We used apple juice to sweeten the bread, but 
this recipe is equally tasty made with orange 
juice or cranberry juice. 

Soft butter, for the pan 

2 cups all-purpose flour, plus more 
for the pan 


1/2 teaspoon baking powder 

1 teaspoon baking soda 
1 teaspoon salt 


1/2 cup molasses 
1/2 cup sugar 


1/2 cup vegetable oil 
2 large eggs, lightly beaten 


1 cup Pumpkin Puree (recipe follows), 
or canned 


2 tablespoons apple juice 

1/2 cup roughly chopped dried cranberries 
1/2 cup roughly chopped walnuts 


8 ounces cream cheese, room temperature 
1/4 cup honey 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees  F. Butter and flour a 
5 x 9-inch loaf pan; set aside. In a medium bowl, 
combine the flour, baking powder, baking soda, and 
salt; set aside. 
2. In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the 
paddle attachment, beat the molasses, sugar, oil, 
eggs, pumpkin, and apple juice. Add the flour mixture; 
mix until combined. Fold in cranberries and 
walnuts. Spoon mixture into prepared pan, and 
bake until a cake tester inserted into the center 
comes out clean, about 1 hour. Let the bread sit for 
about 10 minutes, and then turn the bread out of 
the pan onto a wire rack to cool completely. 
3. While the bread cools, make the frosting. Combine 
the cream cheese and honey in the bowl of an 
electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment; 
beat until smooth and well combined. Once the 
bread is completely cooled, spread the top with 
frosting. Serve. 
pumpkin puree 

MAKES 3 CUPS 

1 31/2-pound pumpkin, such as Small Sugar 
Pie, cut in half 


Preheat the oven to 425 degrees F. Place the pumpkin cut 
side down on a baking pan; roast until tender, 50 to 
60 minutes. Remove from the oven; let cool. Using 
a large spoon, scrape out and discard seeds. Remove 
the flesh; transfer to the bowl of a food processor. 
Process until completely pureed without any solid 
pieces, about 1 minute. Transfer to a bowl. Refrigerate 
up to several days or freeze up to 1 month. 

BREADS 571 


jalapeno corn muffins 

MAKES 12 

8 tablespoons (1 stick) unsalted butter, plus 
more for the tin, melted 

3/4 cup nonfat buttermilk 
2 large eggs 
1/2 cup sour cream 
1 cup yellow cornmeal 


1 cup all-purpose flour 
1/2 cup packed light-brown sugar 


2 tablespoons baking powder 

1 teaspoon coarse salt 

2 jalapeno peppers, seeded and 
finely chopped 


1/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons fresh or frozen 
(thawed) corn kernels 


Unsalted butter, for serving 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Brush the cups of a 
standard 12-cup muffin tin with melted butter, and 
set aside. Whisk together the buttermilk, eggs, and 
sour cream in a medium bowl until combined, 
and set aside. Whisk together the cornmeal, flour, 
sugar, baking powder, salt, jalapenos, and corn in 
a large bowl until combined. 
2. With a rubber spatula, fold the buttermilk mixture 
into the cornmeal mixture until well combined. 
Fold in the melted butter. Divide the batter among 
the muffin cups, filling each three-quarters full. 
Bake until a cake tester inserted into the centers 
comes out clean, about 25 minutes. Let the muffins 
cool in the tin 5 minutes. Turn out into a basket or 
bowl lined with a clean kitchen towel; cover to keep 
warm. Serve with butter. 
olive oil biscuits 

MAKES 26 

1/2 cup extra-virgin olive oil 

1/2 cup sugar 

1/4 teaspoon baking soda 

11/2 teaspoons fresh lemon juice 
1/4 cup dry white wine 

1/4 cup sesame seeds, plus more 
for sprinkling 


2 teaspoons freshly grated lemon zest 

1 teaspoon fennel seeds, crushed, 
plus more for sprinkling 


1/2 teaspoon salt 
Pinch of freshly ground white pepper 


13/4 cups plus 2 tablespoons all-purpose flour 
1 large egg 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F with racks in the upper 
and lower thirds. In the bowl of an electric mixer 
fitted with the paddle attachment, beat the oil and 
sugar on medium speed, about 2 minutes. In a small 
bowl, dissolve the baking soda in the lemon juice; 
add to the oil mixture along with the wine, sesame 
seeds, zest, fennel seeds, salt, and white pepper. Beat 
until combined. Add the flour, and beat until just 
combined. 
2. Line 2 baking sheets with parchment paper; set 
aside. In a small bowl, beat the egg with 2 teaspoons 
water; set aside. Form the biscuits by rolling tablespoons 
of dough into   logs and joining the 
ends to make circles. Brush the tops with egg wash; 
sprinkle with sesame seeds and fennel. Arrange on 
the prepared baking sheets, 1 inch apart. Bake the 
biscuits until lightly browned, about 20 minutes, 
rotating the sheets halfway through. Serve warm or 
at room temperature. 
572 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


potato focaccia 

MAKES ONE 12 x 18-INCH LOAF 

Fingerlings are grown in yellow, pink, and blue 
varieties. For a special touch, use an assortment 
of them. Any small potatoes will work just as well 
as fingerlings. 

7 tablespoons olive oil, plus more 
for the bowl and plastic wrap 


1 pound assorted fingerling potatoes 

41/2 teaspoons coarse salt, plus more 
for seasoning 

1 envelope active dry yeast 
(1 scant tablespoon) 


6 cups all-purpose flour 

11/2 tablespoons fresh rosemary, 
coarsely chopped 

Freshly ground pepper 

1. Pour 2 tablespoons olive oil into a 12 x 18-inch 
rimmed baking pan, and spread all over using your 
fingertips; set aside. Place half the potatoes in a 
small saucepan. Cover with cold water; place over 
high heat. Add 3 teaspoons salt when the water 
comes to a boil. Reduce heat to medium-high; cook 
until the potatoes are tender, 10 to 12 minutes. Drain 
in a colander, reserving the liquid. Pass through a 
potato ricer or a food mill and into a bowl; set aside. 
2. Place 1/4 cup reserved warm liquid into the bowl 
of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment. 
Sprinkle in the yeast, and stir well; let stand 
until creamy, 5 to 10 minutes. Add 21/4 cups more 
reserved liquid, 2 tablespoons olive oil, and the reserved 
mashed potatoes; beat until combined. In a 
large bowl, whisk together the flour and remaining 
11/2 teaspoons salt; add to the potato mixture. Mix 
on low speed until the flour is incorporated, about 
3 minutes. Change to the dough hook, and knead 
on medium-high until the dough is smooth and 
elastic and is slightly tacky when squeezed but does 
not stick to your fingers, 4 to 5 minutes. 
3. Turn the dough out onto a clean surface, and 
knead into a ball. Place in a lightly oiled large bowl, 
cover with plastic wrap, and let stand at room temperature 
until doubled in size, 1 to 11/2 hours. 
4. Preheat the oven to 425 degrees  F. Spread the dough 
evenly in the prepared baking pan. Cover with oiled 
plastic wrap, and let stand in a warm place until the 
dough has filled the entire pan and has increased 
in size by about one-third, about 30 minutes. 
5. Using a mandoline or a knife, slice the remaining 
potatoes into very thin rounds. Transfer to a 
bowl. Add half the rosemary and 1 tablespoon olive 
oil; season with salt and pepper. Toss to coat the 
potatoes well. 
6. Remove the plastic wrap; dimple the dough with 
your fingertips, leaving deep indentations. Drizzle 
with the remaining 2 tablespoons oil. Gently press 
the reserved sliced potatoes into the dough. Sprinkle 
with the remaining rosemary. Bake until golden 
brown, 30 to 35 minutes. Remove from the oven; 
transfer to a wire rack. Serve warm. 
julia dunlinson's 
potato griddle scones 

MAKES 16 

These British scones, created by the mother of 
Martha Stewart Living design director James 
Dunlinson, resemble small, thick pancakes. 

11/2 pounds russet potatoes, peeled and sliced 

1 tablespoon unsalted butter, melted, 
plus more for the griddle 


1/2 cup all-purpose flour, plus more 
for the work surface 


1 teaspoon salt 

Butter and jam, for serving (optional) 

1. Place the potatoes in a small saucepan; cover with 
cold water, and bring to a boil over high heat. Cook 
until very tender, about 12 minutes. Drain; transfer 
to a medium bowl. Using a potato ricer or a food 
mill, mash the potatoes (you should have 5 cups 
mashed). Add the melted butter, flour, and salt. Stir 
with a wooden spoon until the dough comes together. 
Transfer to a clean work surface; knead until 
smooth, being careful not to overwork the dough. 
BREADS 573 


2. Heat a griddle over medium heat. Roll out the 
dough to   thickness on a lightly floured surface. 
Using a 2  cookie cutter, cut out rounds, 
and prick with a fork. Lightly butter the griddle; 
cook the scones in batches until golden brown, 
about 5 minutes per side. Transfer to a clean kitchen 
towel, keeping the scones covered while cooking 
the remaining scones. Serve warm with butter and 
jam, if desired. 
buttermilk biscuits 

MAKES 15 

4 cups all-purpose flour, plus more 
for dusting 


4 teaspoons baking powder 

1 teaspoon baking soda 
11/2 teaspoons coarse salt 

1 teaspoon sugar 
1 cup (2 sticks) unsalted butter, 
cut into pieces 
2 cups buttermilk 


1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees  F. In a medium bowl, 
whisk the flour, baking powder, baking soda, salt, 
and sugar. Using a pastry blender or 2 knives, cut 
in the butter until the mixture resembles coarse 
crumbs. 
2. Add the buttermilk; stir just until the mixture 
comes together; the batter will be sticky. Transfer 
to a lightly floured work surface; use your floured 
fingers to pat the dough to   thickness. Use a 
2  round biscuit cutter or cookie cutter to cut 
out the biscuits, as close together as possible to 
minimize scraps. 
3. Transfer to a baking sheet; bake for 18 to 20 minutes, 
or until lightly browned. Remove from the 
oven; cool on a wire rack. Serve warm. 
CHEDDAR MIX-IN Add 3 cups (9 ounces) grated 
Cheddar cheese to the butter and flour mixture 
after the butter has been cut in. Proceed with the 
remainder of the recipe. 

cornmeal drop biscuits 

MAKES 10 

11/2 cups all-purpose flour 

1 cup yellow cornmeal, preferably 
stone-ground 


21/2 teaspoons baking powder 

1/2 teaspoon salt 

2 teaspoons sugar 

1/2 cup (1 stick) unsalted butter 

1 cup plus 1 tablespoon milk 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. In a medium bowl, 
combine the flour, cornmeal, baking powder, salt, 
and sugar. Whisk to combine. Add the butter, and, 
using a pastry blender or 2 knives, cut it in until the 
mixture resembles coarse crumbs. 
2. Add the milk, and stir until just combined. 
3. Spoon 10 mounds, about 1/2 cup each, onto a baking 
sheet 1 inch apart; bake until the biscuits start 
to brown, about 20 minutes. Remove from the oven; 
cool on a wire rack. Serve warm. 
BACON AND ONION MIX-IN Cut 6 ounces bacon into 
  pieces, and cook over medium heat, stirring 
occasionally, until crisp, about 4 minutes. Using a 
slotted spoon, transfer to a paper-towel-lined bowl. 
Add 1 small onion, cut into   dice, to the hot 
fat in the skillet; cook until translucent, about 3 minutes. 
Drain on paper towels. Add the bacon and 
onion to the butter and flour mixture after the butter 
has been cut in. Proceed with the recipe. 

574 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


angel biscuits 

MAKES 24 

Yeast is used as part of the leavening to give 
these biscuits the light, airy texture that inspired 
their name. 

6 cups all-purpose flour, plus more 
for dusting 


2 teaspoons sugar 

1 teaspoon baking soda 
1 tablespoon baking powder 


11/2 teaspoons coarse salt 

1 envelope active dry yeast 
(1 scant tablespoon) 


1/4 cup warm water (105 degrees  to 110 degrees F) 
1 cup (2 sticks) butter, melted and 
cooled to 115 degrees  F 
2 cups buttermilk, room temperature 


1. In a medium bowl, sift or whisk together the flour, 
sugar, baking soda, baking powder, and salt; set 
aside. Sprinkle the yeast over the warm water, and 
allow to stand until creamy looking, about 5 minutes. 
2. In a medium bowl, combine 1 cup of the flour 
mixture and the yeast mixture, melted butter, and 
1 cup buttermilk. Stir to combine. Add the remaining 
flour and buttermilk alternately, stirring between 
additions. When a sticky dough forms, cover 
it with plastic wrap; refrigerate 2 hours. 
3. Preheat the oven to 450 degrees F. Remove the dough 
from the refrigerator, and turn out onto a lightly 
floured work surface. Knead a few times, and roll to 
a   thickness. Cut out with a 2  round 
biscuit or cookie cutter, and place on a baking sheet 
about 1 inch apart. Bake 12 to 15 minutes or until 
golden on top and done in the middle. Remove from 
the oven; cool on a wire rack. Serve warm. 
creamed corn bread 

MAKES ONE 8-INCH-SQUARE BREAD 

2 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted, 
plus more for pan 


1 cup all-purpose flour 

3/4 cup yellow cornmeal 
1 tablespoon baking powder 
1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 


1/2 cup milk 
1/2 cup sour cream 


1 large egg 
1/3 cup sugar 


1 143/4-ounce can creamed corn 

1. Preheat the oven to 425 degrees F. Brush an 8-inch-square 
baking pan with butter. Set aside. 
2. Combine the flour, cornmeal, baking powder, and 
salt in a medium mixing bowl. 
3. Whisk together the milk, sour cream, egg, sugar, 
and butter in a small bowl. Stir in the creamed corn. 
Fold the wet ingredients into the dry ingredients 
until well combined. 
4. Pour the batter into the prepared pan; bake until 
set and golden brown, about 30 minutes. Cool 
slightly on a wire rack before cutting into squares. 
BREADS 575 


oyster biscuits 

MAKES ABOUT 24 

1 cup all-purpose flour, plus more 
for the work surface 


3/4 teaspoon coarse salt, plus more for 
sprinkling 
1 teaspoon baking powder 
1/2 teaspoon ground cumin or coriander 


Pinch of cayenne pepper 
2 tablespoons unsalted butter or shortening 

1/2 cup milk 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees  F. Place the flour, salt, 
baking powder, cumin or coriander, and cayenne in 
the bowl of a food processor fitted with the metal 
blade; pulse to combine. Add the butter or shortening; 
pulse until coarse crumbs form. With the machine 
running, add the milk slowly through the feed 
tube, just until the dough comes together. 
2. Turn out the dough onto a lightly floured surface, 
and knead once or twice until smooth. Roll out to 
1/4 inch thick. Sprinkle with salt, and roll lightly to 
make it adhere. Using a 1  round or octagonal 
cookie cutter, cut out the dough, and transfer to an 
ungreased baking sheet. Gather together the scraps; 
reroll to cut out additional biscuits, if desired. Bake 
until golden, about 20 minutes. Transfer the pan to 
a wire rack to cool slightly before serving. 
sweet-milk biscuits 

MAKES ABOUT 20 

5 cups all-purpose flour, plus 
more for dusting 


2 tablespoons sugar 
2 tablespoons baking powder 


1 tablespoon coarse salt 

3/4 cup cold lard or vegetable shortening, 
cut into pieces 
1/4 cup cold unsalted butter, cut into 
pieces, plus 1/4 cup melted butter 


13/4 cups whole milk 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Whisk together flour, 
sugar, baking powder, and salt in a medium bowl. 
Work lard and butter into flour mixture with a pastry 
cutter or your fingers until largest pieces are the 
size of small peas. Add milk, and stir with a fork 
until a dough forms. 
2. Turn out dough onto a lightly floured surface, 
and pat out to 1 inch thick. Cut out rounds with a 
floured 2  biscuit cutter. Space 2 inches apart 
on a baking sheet lined with parchment paper. 
Gather together scraps, and repeat. 
3. Brush tops with melted butter. Bake until light-
golden brown on top and cooked through, about 25 
minutes. Transfer to a wire rack to cool 5 minutes 
before serving. 
576 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


rosemary-oatmeal tea breads 

MAKES THREE 6-INCH LOAVES 

3 large sprigs fresh rosemary, 
plus 1 tablespoon finely chopped 


1 large egg white, lightly beaten, 
plus 1 large egg 


Superfine or granulated sugar, 

for dusting 

5 tablespoons unsalted butter, 
softened, plus more for pans 


11/2 cups all-purpose flour 
1/2 cup plus 2 tablespoons sugar 

3/4 teaspoon salt 
2 teaspoons baking powder 
1/2 teaspoon ground cinnamon 

3/4 cup whole milk 
1 cup old-fashioned rolled oats 

1. Brush rosemary sprigs with egg white. Lightly 
dust with sugar. Set aside. 
2. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Lightly butter three 
6 x   loaf pans. Whisk together flour, sugar, 
salt, baking powder, and cinnamon in a large bowl; 
set aside. 
3. Melt butter with milk and chopped rosemary in 
a small saucepan over low heat. Remove from heat, 
and stir in oats. Let cool slightly. Whisk whole egg 
into oat mixture; add to flour mixture, and stir just 
until flour is incorporated. 
4. Divide batter evenly among prepared pans. Place 
1 sugared rosemary sprig on top of each loaf. Bake 
until tops are deep golden brown, 25 to 30 minutes. 
Let cool in pans on a wire rack 10 minutes. Turn out 
onto rack; let cool completely. Store in an airtight 
container at room temperature up to 3 days. 
cream scones 

MAKES 8 TO 10 

2 cups all-purpose flour, plus more for 
work surface, hands, and cutter 


3 tablespoons sugar, plus more for 
sprinkling 


1 tablespoon baking powder 

1/2 teaspoon salt 
6 tablespoons cold unsalted butter, 
cut into small pieces 
1/3 cup heavy cream, plus more for brushing 


2 large eggs, lightly beaten 
Strawberry preserves, for serving 


Softly whipped cream, for serving 

1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Line a baking sheet 
with parchment paper; set aside. 
2. Sift together the flour, sugar, baking powder, and 
salt into a large bowl. Using a pastry blender or 2 
knives, cut in butter until largest pieces are the size 
of small peas. 
3. Using a fork, whisk together the cream and eggs 
in a large glass measuring cup. Make a well in the 
center of flour mixture, and pour in cream mixture. 
Stir lightly with fork just until the dough comes 
together (do not overmix). 
4. Turn out dough onto a lightly floured work surface. 
With floured hands, gently pat dough into a 
41/2 x 8  rectangle, about 3/4 inch thick. Using 
a floured   round cutter, cut out 8 to 10 rounds, 
and transfer them to lined baking sheet. Brush tops 
with cream, and sprinkle with sugar. Bake scones 
until golden brown, 16 to 20 minutes. Transfer 
scones to wire racks, and let cool. Serve warm or at 
room temperature, topped with strawberry preserves 
and whipped cream. 
BREADS 577 


carrot tea cake 

SERVES 10 TO 12 

10 tablespoons (11/4 sticks) unsalted butter, 
softened, plus more for mold 


11/4 cups all-purpose flour, plus more for mold 

1/2 cup plus 2 tablespoons packed 
light-brown sugar 
2 large eggs 


11/2 teaspoons pure vanilla extract 
1 cup grated carrots

1 teaspoon baking powder 

1 teaspoon coarse salt 

1/2 teaspoon baking soda 

1/2 cup walnuts, toasted, finely chopped 

1 teaspoon confectioners' sugar 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Butter a 9-inch (5-cup) 
trois freres mold or Bundt pan. Dust with flour, and 
tap out excess. Put butter and brown sugar into the 
bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment. 
Mix on medium-high speed until pale 
and fluffy, about 3 minutes. 
2. Add eggs, one at a time, mixing well after each 
addition. Add the vanilla and carrots, and mix until 
just combined. Reduce speed to low. Add flour, baking 
powder, salt, and baking soda. Mix until just 
combined. Stir in walnuts. 
3. Pour batter into the prepared mold. Bake until a 
cake tester inserted into center comes out clean, 
about 30 minutes. Let cool in pan on a wire rack 15 
minutes. Turn out cake onto rack, and let cool completely. 
Before serving, dust with confectioners' 
sugar. The cake can be stored in an airtight container 
at room temperature up to 3 days. 
polenta quick bread 
with lemon and thyme 

MAKES ONE 9-INCH LOAF 

3/4 cup (11/2 sticks) unsalted butter, 
softened, plus more for pan 
1/3 cup all-purpose flour, plus more for pan 

3/4 cup sugar 
1 tablespoon finely grated lemon zest, plus 
2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 

3 large eggs 

1 tablespoon coarsely chopped fresh 
thyme leaves, plus sprigs for garnish 


1 cup fine yellow cornmeal (preferably 
stone-ground) 


1 teaspoon baking powder 

3/4 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/4 cup pine nuts, toasted, half coarsely 
chopped and half whole 


1. Preheat the oven to 325 degrees F. Butter a 9 x   loaf 
pan. Dust with flour; tap out excess. Put butter and 
sugar into the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with 
the paddle attachment. Mix on medium-high speed 
until pale and fluffy, about 3 minutes. 
2. Add lemon zest; mix 1 minute. Add eggs, one at 
a time, mixing well after each addition. Mix in 
lemon juice and thyme. Add flour, cornmeal, baking 
powder, and salt, and mix until just combined. 
Stir in chopped pine nuts. 
3. Pour batter into prepared pan. Sprinkle with 
whole pine nuts. Bake until a tester inserted into 
the center comes out clean, 50 to 55 minutes. Let 
cool completely on a wire rack. Garnish with thyme. 
The bread can be stored in an airtight container at 
room temperature up to 2 days. 
578 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


breakfast 


AND 

brunch 



herb frittata with 
zucchini and yellow squash 


SERVES 6 

1 tablespoon unsalted butter 

21/2 tablespoons olive oil 
7 large eggs 

1/4 cup heavy cream or milk 

1/4 cup coarsely chopped fresh chives, 
plus whole chives for garnish 


1/4 cup coarsely chopped fresh flat- 
leaf parsley 


1/2 teaspoon coarsely chopped fresh thyme 

1/4 teaspoon finely chopped fresh marjoram 
1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 


Freshly ground pepper 

1 small zucchini, cut crosswise 
into thin rounds 


1 small yellow summer squash, cut 
crosswise into thin rounds 


1. Heat the butter with 11/2 tablespoons oil in a 10inch 
ovenproof nonstick skillet over medium-low 
heat until melted. 
2. Preheat the broiler, with the rack about 7 inches 
from the heat source. Meanwhile, whisk together 
the eggs, cream, and herbs until well blended. Stir 
in the salt, and season with pepper. 
3. Add the egg mixture to the skillet; cook until the 
bottom is set and golden, about 4 minutes. Continue 
to cook, gently shaking the pan occasionally, 
until 1 inch of the edges is almost set, about 4 minutes 
more. Remove from heat. Gently press the zucchini 
and squash on top, overlapping slightly in 
concentric circles. 
4. Broil (checking often) until golden and just 
cooked through in center, 1 to 2 minutes. Gently 
slide onto a plate with a spatula; drizzle with the remaining 
tablespoon oil. Garnish with whole chives. 
blueberry buttermilk flapjacks 

MAKES 10 

13/4 cups all-purpose flour 

31/2 tablespoons sugar 
1 tablespoon baking powder 
1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 
11/2 cups buttermilk 
2 large eggs, room temperature 
1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 
1 tablespoon unsalted butter, melted, plus 
more, softened, for the skillet and serving 
2 tablespoons plus 2 teaspoons 
vegetable oil 
1 cup blueberries, plus more for garnish 
Pure maple syrup, for serving 

1. Sift together the flour, sugar, baking powder, and 
salt. Whisk together the buttermilk, eggs, vanilla, 
1 tablespoon butter, and 2 tablespoons oil; whisk 
into the flour mixture. Fold in the blueberries. Set 
batter aside. 
2. Heat 1/2 teaspoon butter and 2 teaspoons oil in a 
large nonstick skillet over medium heat. Pour in 1/3 
cup batter. Cook until small bubbles form, about 3 
minutes. Flip; cook until golden brown, about 3 
minutes. Repeat with the remaining batter, adding 
butter as needed. Serve with butter and syrup; garnish 
with berries. 
580 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


coddled eggs with fine herbs 

SERVES 4 

1 slice whole-wheat bread, crusts removed, 
cut into   cubes, for garnish 


Freshly ground pepper 
1 tablespoon finely chopped fresh chives 


2 tablespoons finely chopped fresh chervil 
1 tablespoon finely chopped fresh tarragon 

1 tablespoon finely chopped fresh flat- 
leaf parsley 


4 large whole eggs 

4 large egg whites 
1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon heavy cream 


1 teaspoon coarse salt 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Lightly coat 4 egg 
coddlers with cooking spray, and set aside. Lightly 
coat a rimmed baking sheet with cooking spray. 
Place the bread cubes on the baking sheet; sprinkle 
with pepper. Bake until golden and crisp on all 
sides, turning them once during cooking, about 7 
minutes. Remove from the oven; set aside. 
2. Line the bottom of a large saucepan with a 
kitchen towel, and fill with enough water to come 
just below the rim of the egg coddlers. Place the 
pan over medium-high heat; bring the water to a 
boil. Combine the herbs in a small bowl, and mix 
well. Place 2 teaspoons mixed herbs in the bottom 
of each coddler; to each, add 1 whole egg and 1 egg 
white, and drizzle with 1 teaspoon heavy cream. Add 
1/4 teaspoon salt to each, and season with pepper. 
Screw lids on tightly. 
PEELING HARD-COOKED EGGS 

The fresher the egg, the harder it is to peel. 
This is because peelability is affected by the 
pH of the egg white; when the pH is below 
8.9, the inner membrane tends to adhere to 
the albumen (egg white). Fresh eggs often 
have a pH of around 8.0. You might want to 
consider leaving fresh eggs in the refrigerator 
for at least 3 days before boiling them, or 
even longer; eggs can be safely refrigerated 
for up to 1 month. 

After boiling the eggs, transfer them immediately 
to a bowl of ice water, and let them 
stand for 10 minutes to stop the cooking 
(cold eggs are easier to peel). To peel an egg, 
place it on your work surface, and roll it 
under your palm to crack the shell. Holding 
the egg under cold running water as you peel 
it can also help. 

BREAKFAST AND BRUNCH 581 


toad-in-the-hole 

SERVES 4 

2 large eggs 

2/3 cup milk 
1 tablespoon Dijon mustard 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
1/2 cup all-purpose flour 


3 tablespoons vegetable oil or bacon fat 

5 English-style fresh pork sausages, 
casings removed 


1 tablespoon chopped fresh rosemary 
Onion Gravy (recipe follows) 


1. Preheat the oven to 425 degrees  F. In a medium bowl, 
whisk together the eggs, milk, 2/3 cup water, and 
mustard; season with salt and pepper. Whisk in the 
flour. Let stand 20 minutes. 
2. Coat a 13 x 9-inch or 31/2-quart baking dish with 
the oil; heat in the oven 10 minutes. Remove from 
the oven. Pour the batter into the dish. Arrange the 
sausages on top; sprinkle with rosemary. Bake until 
puffed, 25 to 30 minutes. Serve with gravy. 
onion gravy 

MAKES 1 CUP 

3 tablespoons unsalted butter 
2 medium onions, halved and thinly sliced 


1 tablespoon all-purpose flour 
1/3 cup Madeira wine 


1 cup homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock 


1/2 teaspoon Worcestershire sauce 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


1. Melt the butter in a large skillet over medium 
heat. Cook the onions, stirring, until golden, 10 to 
15 minutes. Cover; cook over low heat until brown, 
about 25 minutes. 
2. Add the flour. Cook, stirring constantly, 2 minutes. 
Remove from heat; whisk in the wine, stock, 
and Worcestershire sauce. Bring to a boil. Reduce 
heat; simmer until thick, about 10 minutes. Season 
with salt and pepper. Serve immediately. 
strawberry-rhubarb coffee cake 

SERVES 15 

The batter for this cake is much like that for a biscuit; 
the chilled butter is cut in rather than 
creamed to produce a tender crumb. This recipe 
was developed by Emily Donahue for Rosey's 
Coffee and Tea in Hanover, New Hampshire. 

11/4 cups chilled unsalted butter, 
plus more, softened, for the pan 

1/4 cup freshly squeezed lemon juice 
(about 2 lemons) 


1/3 cup cornstarch 
23/4 cups sugar 

1 pound strawberries, hulled and sliced 
11/2 pounds rhubarb, trimmed and 
cut into   pieces 
33/4 cups all-purpose flour 

1 teaspoon baking powder 
1/2 teaspoon baking soda 


Pinch of salt 
2 large eggs 


11/2 cups buttermilk 
1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Brush a 9 x 12 x   
baking pan with butter, and set aside. Make the fruit 
sauce: Combine the lemon juice, cornstarch, and 
1 cup sugar in a medium saucepan. Add the strawberries 
and rhubarb; cook, stirring frequently, over 
medium heat, until the rhubarb is soft and the 
liquid has thickened, 15 to 20 minutes. Transfer to 
a medium bowl; let cool. 
2. Make the crumb topping: Combine 3/4 cup sugar 
and 3/4 cup flour in a medium bowl. Melt 1/4 cup butter 
in a small saucepan over low heat. Drizzle the 
butter over the flour mixture; using your hands, mix 
until crumbly. Set aside. 
582 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


3. Make the cake batter: Whisk together the remaining 
3 cups flour and 1 cup sugar, baking powder, 
baking soda, and salt in a large bowl. Using a 
pastry knife or 2 forks, cut the butter into the flour 
mixture until it resembles coarse meal. In a separate 
bowl, mix the eggs, buttermilk, and vanilla. 
Pour into the flour mixture; stir to combine. 
4. Spread half the cake batter evenly into the prepared 
pan. Top with half the fruit sauce. Carefully 
spread the remaining batter over the fruit, and top 
with the remaining fruit sauce. Sprinkle with the 
crumb topping. 
5. Bake until the cake is golden brown and springs 
back when touched in the center, about 1 hour. 
Transfer the pan to a wire rack to cool slightly. Serve 
warm or at room temperature, cut into squares. 
steel-cut oat porridge 

SERVES 4 

Steel-cut oats (also called Irish or Scottish oats) 
take longer to cook than rolled oats but are 
creamier and chewier. 

11/4 cups skim milk 
1 whole cinnamon stick 

1/4 teaspoon coarse salt 
1 cup steel-cut oats 
1 banana 
4 Medjool dates, coarsely chopped 
2 tablespoons brown flaxseed 


1. Bring 3 cups water, 1 cup milk, the cinnamon 
stick, and the salt to a boil in a medium saucepan. 
Stir in the oats. Return to a boil. Reduce heat; partially 
cover. Cook, stirring occasionally, until the 
mixture is thick and the oats are tender, about 25 
minutes. Discard the cinnamon stick. 
2. Cut the banana crosswise into  -thick 
rounds. Top the porridge with the banana and dates. 
Sprinkle with flaxseed. Drizzle each serving with 1 
tablespoon milk. 
SOAKING STEEL-CUT OATS 

Steel-cut oats, also known as Irish or Scottish 
oats, are the result of chopping the whole oat 
grains into small pieces with steel blades. 
Rolled (or old-fashioned) oats, on the other 
hand, are steamed and flattened before being 
cut to make them more tender. For this reason, 
they cook much faster than the steel-cut 
variety and are often preferred as an 
everyday option. But if you prefer the 
pleasantly chewy texture offered by steel-cut 
oats, there is a way to reduce the cooking time 
by almost half without sacrificing taste or 
texture. Simply soak the oats overnight in a 
pot of water to begin softening the very hard 
coating that surrounds each grain. Bring the 
water to a boil before stirring in the oats to 
jump-start the softening process, and then 
allow the mixture to come back to room 
temperature and sit, covered, overnight. In the 
morning, all you will need to do is warm the 
oats over medium-low heat, stir, and serve. 

Even if you don't have time to or forget to 
soak the oats, you can still make them in the 
morning; it will just take a little bit longer. 
Stir the oats into boiling, salted water, and 
simmer for about half an hour. Don't stir too 
often; it will break up the grains and make 
the texture gluey. 

You might also decide to toast the oats 
before cooking to bring out their nutty flavor. 
Simply heat a little melted butter over 
medium heat and toast the oats, tossing 
them gently in the pan or stirring a little with 
a spoon, until brown and fragrant. Then cook 
in simmering water. 

BREAKFAST AND BRUNCH 583 


cottage cheese pancakes 
with lemon 

MAKES 24; SERVES 6 

After making the batter, cook the pancakes immediately 
to ensure they retain their volume. 

6 large eggs, separated, yolks lightly beaten 

Pinch of cream of tartar 
2 cups 2% cottage cheese 


1/4 cup granulated sugar 
2/3 cup all-purpose flour 


1/2 teaspoon baking powder 
1/4 teaspoon coarse salt 


1/4 teaspoon ground cinnamon 
Vegetable oil cooking spray 


1 tablespoon confectioners' sugar 
2 lemons (1 zested; 1 cut into wedges) 


1. Beat the egg whites on medium-high speed until 
foamy. Add the cream of tartar; beat until stiff, 
glossy peaks form. 
2. Heat a griddle or large skillet over medium-high 
heat. Stir together the yolks, cottage cheese, granulated 
sugar, flour, baking powder, salt, and cinnamon 
in a medium bowl. Whisk in one-third of the 
whites. In 2 batches, gently fold in the remaining 
whites with a rubber spatula. 
3. Spray a griddle with cooking spray; heat until a 
drop of batter sizzles upon contact. Working in 
batches, pour 1/4 cup batter per pancake onto the 
griddle; cook until the surfaces bubble and the 
edges are slightly dry, about 1 minute. Flip the pancakes; 
cook until the undersides are golden brown, 
about 3 minutes more. Divide the confectioners' 
sugar among the pancakes. Serve sprinkled with 
lemon zest and with lemon wedges on the side. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 218 CALORIES, 

6 G FAT, 216 MG CHOLESTEROL, 23 G CARBOHYDRATE, 

152 MG SODIUM, 17 G PROTEIN, 1 G FIBER 

poached eggs with 
spinach and tomatoes 

SERVES 4 

4 large eggs 

1 tablespoon olive oil 
16 grape tomatoes, halved crosswise 


1 teaspoon coarse salt 
Freshly ground pepper 


8 ounces baby or regular spinach, tough 
stems discarded (about 16 cups) 


1 garlic clove 

2 tablespoons distilled white vinegar 
1 tablespoon finely chopped fresh chives 


1. Fill a large, shallow, straight-sided pan with 2 
inches water. Bring to a boil. Break each egg into a 
small ramekin. 
2. Meanwhile, heat the oil in a medium nonstick 
skillet over medium heat until hot but not smoking. 
Add the tomatoes; cook, stirring, until they start to 
break down, about 5 minutes. Add the salt; season 
with pepper. Transfer to a plate; tent with foil to 
keep warm. Add the spinach and garlic to the skillet; 
cook, stirring, until the spinach has just wilted, 
1 to 2 minutes. Discard the garlic. 
3. When the water is boiling, add the vinegar; turn 
off heat. Using tongs, tilt the ramekins in the pan, 
and slide the eggs into the water. Cover; let stand 
until the whites are opaque and the yolks are 
cooked as desired, 2 to 3 minutes. Use a slotted 
spoon to put the eggs on paper towels to drain. Trim 
the whites, if desired. 
4. Divide the spinach among 4 plates; lay 1 poached 
egg and 8 tomato halves on top. Season with pepper; 
sprinkle each serving with 3/4 teaspoon chives. 
NOTE: Partially cooked eggs should not be prepared 
for pregnant women, babies, young children, the elderly, 
or anyone whose health is compromised. 

FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 209 CALORIES, 

14 G FAT, 425 MG CHOLESTEROL, 7 G CARBOHYDRATE, 

457 MG SODIUM, 15 G PROTEIN, 2 G FIBER 

584 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


bread pudding with 
ham, leeks, and cheese 

SERVES 6 TO 8 

Using both Gruyere and fontina gives this savory 
dish complex flavor-and they melt beautifully. If 
you use only Gruyere, just double the amount. 
You can assemble most of this dish up to 1 day 
ahead and refrigerate, covered; then add the batter, 
and bake. 

2 tablespoons unsalted butter, plus 
more for the dish 


1 bunch leeks (4 to 6), white and pale- 
green parts only, halved lengthwise, cut 
into  -thick half-moons, and rinsed 
well (about 3 heaping cups) 


1 teaspoon coarse salt, plus more 
for seasoning 


1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper, 
plus more for seasoning 


8 large eggs 
1 quart milk 


8 slices challah or brioche (1/2 inch thick) 
6 ounces thinly sliced ham 


2 tablespoons thyme leaves 
1 cup grated Gruyere cheese (4 ounces) 


1 cup grated fontina cheese (4 ounces) 

1. Preheat the oven to 325 degrees F. Butter a 9 x 1  
casserole dish. Heat the butter in a medium skillet 
over medium heat. Cook the leeks, covered, until 
softened, about 5 minutes. Season with salt and pepper, 
and transfer to a small bowl. 
2. Whisk together the eggs and milk. Whisk in the 
salt and pepper. Set the batter aside. 
3. Layer the bread, ham, reserved leeks, thyme, and 
cheeses shingle-style in the buttered dish. Pour the 
batter over the top; press gently so the bread absorbs 
the liquid. 
4. Bake until puffed and golden brown (tent with 
foil if the edges brown too much before the center 
is set), about 1 hour. 
yogurt parfaits 
with blueberries and lemon 


SERVES 6 

You can prepare the blueberry sauce and the 
lemony yogurt up to 2 days ahead, and refrigerate 
both in airtight containers. To serve, simply 
spoon the layers into juice glasses and garnish. 

3 containers blueberries (4.4 ounces each; 
about 3 cups) 


1/2 cup confectioners' sugar 

1 quart plain whole-milk yogurt, 
preferably Greek 


1 teaspoon fresh lemon juice, plus 

2 teaspoons freshly grated lemon zest 

1. Set aside 1/2 cup blueberries for garnish. Put the 
remaining blueberries and 1/4 cup sugar in a 
medium saucepan. Cover; cook over medium heat 
5 minutes. Uncover; cook, tossing occasionally, until 
the berries begin to darken, 2 to 3 minutes. Bring 
to a boil; cook 1 minute more. Pour into a medium 
nonreactive bowl; let cool completely. 
2. Put the yogurt, remaining 1/4 cup sugar, and 
lemon juice in a medium bowl. Set aside 1/2 teaspoon 
lemon zest for garnish. Very finely chop the remaining 
11/2 teaspoons lemon zest, then stir it into 
the yogurt. Set the yogurt aside. 
3. Divide the blueberry sauce evenly among 6 juice 
glasses. Divide the yogurt among the glasses, and 
spoon over sauce. Sprinkle with the reserved berries 
and zest. If not serving immediately, refrigerate, 
covered with plastic wrap, up to 3 hours. 
BREAKFAST AND BRUNCH 585 


quiche lorraine 

MAKES ONE 1  QUICHE 

All-purpose flour, for dusting 

Tart Dough (recipe follows) 

10 ounces slab bacon


3 large eggs 

2 cups heavy cream 

3/4 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 
1. On a lightly floured work surface, roll out the 
dough to 1/4 inch thick. Cut out a 1  circle from 
the dough. Press the dough circle onto the bottom 
and up the sides of an 1  tart pan with a removable 
bottom; trim the dough flush with the top 
edge of the pan. Prick the bottom all over with a 
fork. Transfer to a rimmed baking sheet. Freeze until 
firm, about 30 minutes. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. 
2. Line the tart shell with parchment paper, and fill 
with pie weights or dried beans. Bake until the 
dough starts to feel firm on the edges, about 20 minutes. 
Remove the parchment and weights; continue 
baking until the crust is pale golden brown, about 
10 minutes. Let cool completely on a wire rack. 
Leave the oven on. 
3. Cook the bacon in a large skillet over medium 
heat until browned, about 10 minutes. Transfer with 
a slotted spoon to paper towels to drain. 
4. Whisk the eggs, cream, salt, and pepper in a 
medium bowl. Pour the mixture into the tart shell, 
and scatter the bacon strips on top. Bake until 
puffed and pale golden brown, about 30 minutes. 
Let cool at least 30 minutes before serving. 
tart dough 

13/4 cups all-purpose flour 

1/4 teaspoon coarse salt 

1/4 cup coarsely chopped chives, rosemary, 
or thyme (optional) 


9 tablespoons (1. sticks) cold unsalted 
butter, cut into small pieces 


1 large egg plus 1 large egg yolk, beaten 
3 tablespoons ice water 


Process the flour, salt, and herbs (if using) in a food 
processor until combined. Add the butter, and 
process just until the mixture resembles coarse meal. 
Whisk together the egg mixture and the water in a 
small bowl. With the processor running, pour in the 
egg mixture; process until the dough starts to come 
together. Shape the dough into a disk. Wrap in plastic 
wrap, and refrigerate at least 30 minutes. 

586 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


caramelized onion 
and gorgonzola quiche 

MAKES ONE 8 x 1  QUICHE 

All-purpose flour, for dusting 

Tart Dough (opposite) 
1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil 


1 pound onions, cut crosswise into rings 
2 large eggs 


1/2 cup milk 
1/2 cup heavy cream 


1 teaspoon coarse salt 
Freshly ground pepper 


2 ounces Gorgonzola dolce 

1. On a lightly floured work surface, roll out the 
dough to 1/4 inch thick. Press the dough onto the 
bottom and up the sides of an 8 x 1  rectangular 
tart pan with a removable bottom; trim the 
dough flush with the top edge of the pan. Prick the 
bottom all over with a fork. Transfer to a large 
rimmed baking sheet. Freeze until firm, about 30 
minutes. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. 
2. Line the tart shell with parchment paper, and fill 
with pie weights or dried beans. Bake until the 
dough starts to feel firm on the edges, about 20 minutes. 
Remove the parchment and weights; continue 
baking until the crust is pale golden brown, about 
10 minutes. Let cool completely on a wire rack. 
Leave the oven on. 
3. Heat the oil in a large, heavy-bottomed skillet 
over low heat until hot but not smoking. Cook the 
onions, stirring frequently, until golden brown, 
about 30 minutes. Let cool. 
4. Whisk the eggs, milk, cream, and salt in a 
medium bowl; season with pepper. Crumble in the 
cheese, and stir in the caramelized onions. Pour the 
mixture into the tart shell; bake until puffed and 
pale golden brown, 30 to 35 minutes. Let cool at 
least 30 minutes before serving. 
salmon, pea, and mint quiche 

MAKES ONE 11  QUICHE 

All-purpose flour, for dusting 

Tart Dough with chives (opposite) 
1 salmon fillet (about 1 pound), skinned 


3 large eggs 
1 cup milk 


1 cup heavy cream 
2 tablespoons Dijon mustard 


11/2 teaspoons coarse salt 
1/2 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 

1 cup shelled fresh peas or thawed 
frozen peas 


1/3 cup finely shredded fresh mint 

1. On a lightly floured work surface, roll out the 
dough to 1/4 inch thick. Cut out a 14-inch circle from 
the dough. Press the dough circle onto the bottom 
and up the sides of an 11  round ceramic 
quiche dish; trim the dough flush with the top edge 
of the dish. Prick the bottom all over with a fork. 
Transfer to a rimmed baking sheet. Freeze until 
firm, about 30 minutes. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. 
2. Line the tart shell with parchment paper, and fill 
with pie weights or dried beans. Bake until the 
dough starts to feel firm on the edges, about 20 minutes. 
Remove the parchment and weights; continue 
baking until the crust is pale golden brown, about 
10 minutes. Let cool completely on a wire rack. 
Leave the oven on. 
3. Fill a wide medium saucepan halfway with water; 
bring to a simmer over medium heat. Add the 
salmon; simmer until opaque but still pink in middle, 
about 11 minutes. Remove the salmon; let cool. 
4. Flake the salmon with a fork; set aside. Whisk 
the eggs, milk, cream, mustard, salt, and pepper in 
a large bowl. Stir in the salmon, peas, and mint. Pour 
the mixture into the tart shell; bake until puffed and 
pale golden brown, 40 to 45 minutes. Let cool at 
least 30 minutes before serving. 
BREAKFAST AND BRUNCH 587 


cremini and porcini quiches 

MAKES SIX 4-INCH QUICHES 

Tart Dough with thyme (page 586) 

All-purpose flour, for dusting 
1/2 ounce dried porcini mushrooms 


1 cup boiling water 

1 tablespoon unsalted butter 

9 ounces cremini mushrooms, halved 
lengthwise 


2 large eggs plus 1 large egg yolk 

11/2 teaspoons coarse salt 
1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 

3/4 cup heavy cream 
1. Set 6 4-inch cake rings (with 1  sides) on 
a baking sheet lined with parchment paper; set 
aside. Cut the dough into 6 equal pieces. On a 
lightly floured surface, roll out the pieces, 1 at a time, 
to 1/8 inch thick. Using a cake pan as a guide, cut 
an 8-inch circle from each piece. Fit the circles into 
the cake rings, trimming the dough flush with the 
tops of the rings to make tart shells. Prick the bottoms 
all over with a fork. Freeze until firm, at least 
30 minutes. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. 
2. Line the tart shells with parchment paper; fill 
with pie weights or dried beans. Bake until the 
dough edges start to feel firm, about 20 minutes. 
Remove the parchment and weights; continue baking 
until the crusts are pale golden brown, about 
10 minutes. Let cool completely on a wire rack. Reduce 
the oven temperature to 350 degrees F. 
3. Soak the porcini in boiling water; let soften 30 
minutes. Melt the butter in a large skillet over 
medium-high heat; cook the cremini, cut sides 
down, without stirring, until deep golden brown, 
about 5 minutes. Set aside. 
4. Lift out the porcini; pour the soaking liquid 
through a fine sieve into a blender. Add the porcini, 
eggs and yolk, salt, and pepper; blend until smooth. 
Add the cream; blend. 
5. Divide the filling among the tart shells. Arrange 
the cremini in the filling, cut sides up. Bake until 
set, about 40 minutes. Let cool at least 30 minutes 
before serving. 
granola with flaxseed 

MAKES 51/2 CUPS 

Store the granola in an airtight container at room 
temperature up to 1 week. 

2 cups old-fashioned rolled oats 

1 cup sweetened shredded coconut 

3/4 cup sliced blanched almonds 
(about 21/2 ounces) 
1/4 cup vegetable oil 

1/4 cup honey 
1 tablespoon flaxseed oil 


1/2 cup dried cranberries 
1/2 cup golden raisins 


1/4 cup unsalted sunflower seeds 

1 tablespoon ground golden flaxseed 
(from about 11/2 teaspoons whole) 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Toss together the oats, 
coconut, and almonds in a medium bowl; set aside. 
Whisk together the vegetable oil and honey in a 
small bowl; stir into the oats mixture. Spread out 
the oats mixture on a rimmed baking sheet. 
2. Bake, stirring occasionally, until golden brown, 
17 to 20 minutes. Let cool 10 minutes; toss with the 
flaxseed oil. Let cool completely. Transfer to a large 
bowl; stir in the dried cranberries, raisins, sunflower 
seeds, and ground flaxseed. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING (1/2 CUP): 271 CALORIES, 

15 G FAT, 0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 32 G CARBOHYDRATE, 

25 MG SODIUM, 5 G PROTEIN, 4 G FIBER 

588 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


breakfast enchiladas 

SERVES 6 

You can use shredded Monterey Jack cheese in 
place of the cotija and queso blanco. Other wild 
mushrooms, such as shiitakes, can be substituted 
for the porcini. 

12 yellow corn tortillas (6 inches each) 
41/2 teaspoons extra-virgin olive oil 

1 cup fresh corn kernels (1 ear) 
1/2 shallot, finely chopped 
1/2 small zucchini, diced 
1/2 small yellow summer squash, diced 


1 ounce fresh porcini mushrooms, cut into 
  pieces 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
6 large eggs 
3 tablespoons heavy cream 
2 tablespoons unsalted butter 
Red Chile Sauce (recipe follows) 
Green Chile Sauce (recipe follows) 
8 ounces cotija cheese, crumbled 
2 plum tomatoes, seeded and diced 
1/4 cup chopped fresh cilantro 
6 ounces queso blanco, shredded 


1. Wrap the tortillas in a clean kitchen towel; place 
in a bamboo steamer basket. Fill a wok with 2 inches 
water; bring to a boil. Reduce heat to medium; set 
the steamer in the wok. Steam the tortillas until softened, 
6 minutes. (Or wrap the tortillas in a damp, 
clean kitchen towel, and heat until softened, 10 to 
15 seconds in a microwave or 7 to 10 minutes in a 
200 degrees F oven.) Set aside. 
2. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Heat the oil in a large 
nonstick skillet over medium-high heat until hot 
but not smoking. Cook the corn, stirring, until just 
caramelized, about 5 minutes. Add the shallot, zucchini, 
summer squash, and mushrooms; cook, stirring, 
until tender, about 4 minutes. Season with salt 
and pepper. Transfer to a bowl. 
3. Vigorously whisk the eggs and cream until 
blended. Season with salt and pepper. Heat the butter 
in a large nonstick skillet over medium-high 
heat until foamy. Add the egg mixture; cook, stirring, 
until scrambled but not dry, about 4 minutes. 
4. Pour 1/2 cup red chile sauce along 1 long side of 
a 9 x 1  baking dish; pour 1/2 cup green chile 
sauce along the opposite long side (the sauces 
should meet). 
5. Spread 1 tablespoon red chile sauce on 1 tortilla; 
sprinkle 2 tablespoons cotija over the entire surface. 
On the bottom third of the tortilla, place 41/2 
teaspoons each egg and corn mixture, 1 teaspoon 
tomatoes, and 1/2 teaspoon cilantro. Firmly roll the 
tortilla; place in a baking dish, seam side down. Repeat 
with the remaining tortillas. 
6. Pour 1/2 cup each red and green chile sauce on 
top of the enchiladas, mirroring the sauces on the 
bottom. Sprinkle with queso blanco. Bake until 
heated through, about 25 minutes. Garnish with the 
remaining 2 tablespoons cilantro, and serve with 
the remaining chile sauce. 
red chile sauce 

MAKES 3 CUPS 

Be sure your kitchen is well ventilated when you 
soak the New Mexican and guajillo chiles; their 
vapors can be a mild irritant. 

9 dried New Mexican chiles 
6 dried guajillo chiles 
1 quart boiling water, for soaking the chiles 
6 garlic cloves (do not peel) 
6 plum tomatoes 
2 tablespoons vegetable oil 


1/2 large white onion, finely chopped 

41/2 teaspoons New Mexican chili powder 
6 chipotle chiles in adobo sauce, seeded 
1 tablespoon dried Mexican oregano 

Coarse salt 

1. Toast the New Mexican and guajillo chiles in a 
dry large cast-iron skillet over medium-high heat, 
turning, until warm and soft, about 30 seconds per 
side (do not let blacken, or the chiles will be bitter). 
Remove the chiles; reserve the skillet. 
2. Discard the stems; cut the chiles lengthwise with 
kitchen shears, and discard the seeds. Cover the 
chiles with boiling water. Let stand until hydrated, 
about 20 minutes. 
BREAKFAST AND BRUNCH 589 


3. Meanwhile, cook the garlic and tomatoes in the 
skillet over medium-high heat, turning, until 
charred and soft, about 10 minutes. Set the tomatoes 
aside; peel the garlic. 
4. Heat the oil in the skillet over medium-low until 
hot but not smoking. Cook the onion until translucent, 
about 5 minutes. Add the chili powder; cook 
1 minute. Drain chiles, reserving 11/2 cups liquid. 
5. Puree the onion, hydrated chiles, chipotle chiles, 
tomatoes, garlic, and oregano in a blender, adding 
a small amount of the reserved soaking liquid if the 
mixture seems dry. Pass the sauce through a fine 
sieve into the skillet. Cook over medium heat, stirring, 
5 minutes. Add the remaining soaking liquid. 
Simmer until the sauce is thickened, 12 to 15 minutes. 
Season with salt. If not serving immediately, 
refrigerate up to 2 days; reheat over low (add water 
if the sauce seems too thick). 
green chile sauce 

MAKES 3 CUPS 

1 can (27 ounces) whole green chiles, 
drained and seeded 


6 garlic cloves (do not peel) 

4 tomatillos, husked 

2 teaspoons extra-virgin olive oil 

1 small white onion, cut into   pieces 

2 teaspoons dried Mexican oregano 

3/4 teaspoon ground cumin 
Coarse salt 

1. Puree the chiles in a blender, adding a little water 
if the puree seems dry. 
2. Cook the garlic and tomatillos in a dry large cast-
iron skillet over medium-high heat, turning occasionally, 
until golden brown and softened, about 8 
minutes. Peel the garlic. Coarsely chop the garlic 
and tomatillos; set aside. 
3. Heat the oil in the same skillet over medium heat 
until hot but not smoking. Cook the onion until softened 
and translucent, about 5 minutes. Add the chile 
puree, garlic, tomatillos, 1/2 cup water, and the oregano 
and cumin. Bring to a boil; reduce heat. Simmer until 
the sauce is thickened, about 15 minutes. Season with 
salt. If not serving immediately, refrigerate up to 2 
days; reheat over low (add water if the sauce seems 
too thick). 

triple-citrus coffee cake 

MAKES TWO 16-INCH LOAVES; 

EACH SERVES 6 TO 8 

13 tablespoons (1 sticks) unsalted butter, 
melted and cooled, plus more for the bowl 


1/2 cup water, warmed to 110 degrees  F 

2 envelopes active dry yeast 
(2 scant tablespoons) 


2/3 cup plus 1 teaspoon granulated sugar 
1 cup freshly squeezed orange juice 


2 large eggs, lightly beaten, plus 1 large 
egg, lightly beaten, for egg wash 


Finely grated zest of 1 lemon 
Finely grated zest of 1 lime 


Finely grated zest of 1 orange 
1 teaspoon fine salt 


5 to 6 cups all-purpose flour, plus more 
for dusting 


1 pound (two 8-ounce bricks) cream cheese, 
room temperature 

1 cup confectioners' sugar 
2 large egg yolks 


2 teaspoons pure vanilla extract 
1 cup dried cranberries (41/4 ounces) 


2/3 cup poppy seeds 

1. Butter a large bowl; set aside. Stir the warm water, 
yeast, and 1 teaspoon granulated sugar in another 
large bowl until the yeast dissolves. Let stand until 
foamy, about 5 minutes. Whisk in the orange juice, 
2 eggs, remaining 2/3 cup granulated sugar, 1/2 cup 
butter, citrus zests, and salt. Stir in 5 cups flour, 
1 cup at a time (add up to 1 cup flour if needed), until 
the dough pulls away from the sides of the bowl and 
forms a ball. 
2. Turn out the dough onto a lightly floured work 
surface; knead until smooth and slightly sticky, 
about 5 minutes. Transfer to the buttered bowl; 
brush the dough with 1 tablespoon butter. Loosely 
cover with plastic wrap; let the dough rise until doubled 
in bulk, about 11/2 hours. 
590 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


  

BREAKFAST AND BRUNCH 591 


3. Meanwhile, stir the cream cheese, confectioners' 
sugar, egg yolks, and vanilla in a small bowl until 
smooth. Stir in the dried cranberries and poppy 
seeds; set aside. 
4. Butter 2 baking sheets; set aside. Punch down 
the dough, and divide it in half. Roll out 1 half into 
an 11 x 1  rectangle. Brush with 2 tablespoons 
butter, leaving a   border. Spread 11/2 cups filling 
evenly over the butter. Beginning at 1 long side, 
tightly roll the dough into a log, encasing the filling. 
Pinch the seam to seal. 
5. Carefully transfer the log to a prepared baking 
sheet. With a sharp knife, make 6 cuts, about 
2 inches apart, along 1 long side of the log, cutting 
three-quarters of the way across. Lift the first 
segment, turn it cut side up, and lay it flat. Repeat 
with the next segment, twisting so it sits on the 
opposite side of the roll. Continue down the log, 
alternating sides. Repeat with the remaining 
dough, butter, and filling; place on the second baking 
sheet. 

6. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F, with racks in the 
upper and lower thirds. Loosely cover the dough 
with buttered pieces of plastic wrap, and let rise 
until almost doubled in bulk, about 30 minutes. 
Brush the dough with egg wash, avoiding the filling. 
Bake on the upper and lower racks, switching 
the positions of the sheets halfway through, until 
cooked through and golden brown, about 30 minutes. 
Carefully slide the cakes onto wire racks, and 
let cool completely before slicing. 
Even the most basic pancake 
recipe can be improved upon 
when you keep a few key components 
in mind. To start, you need 
the right ingredients. The best 
flour for pancakes is all-
purpose; for a change of pace, 
substitute cornmeal, buckwheat 
flour, or whole-wheat flour for 
half the all-purpose flour. When 
leavening with baking powder 
and/or soda, mixing the batter 
is critical. There are two stages: 
whisking together the dry ingredients, 
and whisking the wet ingredients 
into the dry. Don't 
whisk until smooth and even, or 
the gluten in the flour will develop 
and produce a tough texture. 
Instead, stop mixing while 
the batter is still slightly lumpy, 
with a few clumps of unmoistened 
dry ingredients remaining. 
It is the interaction of liquid and 

MAKING PANCAKES 

the pockets of dry ingredients 
during cooking that produces 
fluffy pancakes. For best results, 
cook the pancakes right away; 
do not let the batter sit longer 
than it takes to heat your pan. 

Next, be aware of your cooking 
surface. The ideal surface is 
very flat and distributes heat 
evenly. The best option is a griddle, 
followed by a large cast-iron 
skillet or nonstick frying pan. 
Whichever surface you use, 
make sure it's at the right temperature 
when you begin. You 
can test for this by flicking 
a few drops of water onto the 
surface; if they bounce, sizzle, 
and disappear in a second, 
your pan is ready. 

Poor quality in the first batch is 
a common problem with pancakes, 
but it needn't be this way. 

The culprit is often too much fat 
on the griddle. If more than a 
very thin layer is used, it gathers 
in tiny puddles beneath the 
batter, which in turn lifts small 
bits off the griddle so they never 
have the chance to brown properly. 
Instead, melt only a small 
amount of butter or fat, and 
wipe the excess away with a 
folded paper towel. This should 
ensure that your first batch is as 
fluffy as the last. 

Now it's time to ladle in the batter. 
If using fruit, place on top of 
the batter right after it's poured, 
distributing the fruit evenly. 
When the batter surface is covered 
with little bubbles, some of 
which have begun to break, it's 
time to flip. The bursting bubbles 
are letting gas escape, so 
flip at just this moment, before 
too many have popped. 

592 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


whole-wheat buttermilk 
pancakes 

SERVES 4 

1 cup whole-wheat flour 

2/3 cup all-purpose flour 
1/3 cup toasted wheat germ 


1 tablespoon packed light-brown sugar 
1 teaspoon baking powder 


1/2 teaspoon baking soda 
1/4 teaspoon salt 


3 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted 
23/4 cups low-fat buttermilk 

2 large eggs, lightly beaten 
Vegetable oil cooking spray 


Pure maple syrup, for serving (optional) 
Raspberries, for serving (optional) 

1. Preheat the oven to 200 degrees F. Whisk together the 
flours, wheat germ, sugar, baking powder, baking 
soda, and salt in a medium bowl; set aside. 
2. Heat a griddle or cast-iron skillet over medium 
heat. Stir together the melted butter, buttermilk, 
and eggs in a medium bowl. Stir the flour mixture 
into the buttermilk mixture until just combined (the 
batter will be slightly lumpy). 
3. Generously coat the griddle with cooking spray. 
Working in batches, pour 1/4 cup batter for each pancake 
onto the griddle. Cook until the surface is bubbling 
and the edges are slightly dry, 3 to 4 minutes. 
Turn the pancakes; cook until the undersides are 
golden brown, 3 to 4 minutes more. Transfer to a 
baking sheet, and keep warm in the oven. Divide 
the pancakes among 4 plates. Serve with syrup and 
berries, if desired. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 396 CALORIES, 

14 G FAT, 124 MG CHOLESTEROL, 53 G CARBOHYDRATE, 

873 MG SODIUM, 17 G PROTEIN, 5 G FIBER 

fluffy pancakes 

SERVES 6 

You can make your own pancake mix by combining 
the dry ingredients and storing them at room 
temperature in a resealable bag until ready to use. 

2 cups all-purpose flour 

6 tablespoons nonfat dry milk 
1/4 cup sugar 


4 teaspoons baking powder 
1 teaspoon salt 


41/2 tablespoons butter, melted 
2 large eggs, lightly beaten 

Maple syrup or maple butter, for 
serving (optional) 


Fresh berries, for serving (optional) 

1. In a medium bowl, mix the flour, nonfat dry milk, 
sugar, baking powder, and salt. 
2. Heat a griddle or cast-iron skillet over medium 
heat. In a medium bowl, combine 4 tablespoons 
melted butter and the dry ingredients. Mix in the 
eggs and 11/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons cold water. Stir 
until just combined; the batter will be slightly lumpy. 
3. Add the remaining 1/2 tablespoon butter to griddle, 
swirling to coat. Pour a scant 1/4 cup batter per 
pancake onto the griddle, and cook until the surface 
bubbles and the edges are slightly dry, about 
2 minutes. Flip the pancakes, and cook until the undersides 
are golden brown. Repeat with the remaining 
batter. Serve the pancakes immediately 
with syrup and berries, if desired. 
BREAKFAST AND BRUNCH 593 


cinnamon-raisin french toast 

SERVES 6 

Any bread is lovely in this buttermilk batter. 

6 large eggs 

11/2 cups buttermilk 
2 tablespoons pure vanilla extract 

1/2 teaspoon ground cinnamon 
Pinch of ground nutmeg 


Pinch of salt 
6  -thick slices cinnamon-raisin 
bread, preferably day-old 
2 tablespoons unsalted butter 


2 tablespoons vegetable oil 
Pure maple syrup (optional) 


1. Whisk together the eggs, buttermilk, vanilla, cinnamon, 
nutmeg, and salt in a medium bowl; set aside. 
2. Place the bread in a shallow baking dish large 
enough to hold the bread slices in a single layer. 
Pour the egg mixture over the bread; soak 10 minutes. 
Turn the slices over; soak 10 minutes more, or 
until soaked through. 
3. Preheat the oven to 250 degrees  F. Place a wire rack on 
a baking sheet; set aside. Heat 1 tablespoon butter 
and 1 tablespoon vegetable oil in a large skillet 
over medium heat. Fry half the bread slices 
until golden brown, 2 to 3 minutes per side. Transfer 
to the wire rack; place in the oven while cooking 
the remaining bread. Wipe out the skillet; 
repeat with the remaining butter, oil, and bread. 
Serve warm with maple syrup, if desired. 
banana-nut french toast 

SERVES 6 

11/2 cups walnuts 

6 large eggs 
11/2 cups heavy cream, half-and-half, or milk 

2 tablespoons pure vanilla extract 
1/2 teaspoon ground cinnamon 


Pinch of ground nutmeg 
Pinch of salt 


6 ripe but firm bananas, peeled and 
cut into   rounds 


11/2 cups packed dark-brown sugar 

12 slices bread (each 1/2 inch thick), such 
as brioche or challah, preferably day-old 


8 tablespoons (1 stick) unsalted butter 

4 tablespoons vegetable oil 
Pure maple syrup, for serving (optional) 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Place the walnuts on 
a rimmed baking sheet, and toast until lightly 
browned and fragrant, about 10 minutes. Set aside. 
When cool, chop the walnuts coarsely. 
2. Whisk together the eggs, cream, vanilla extract, 
cinnamon, nutmeg, and salt in a medium bowl, and 
set aside. Combine the bananas, dark brown sugar, 
and walnuts in another bowl; set aside. Lay out 6 
slices of bread on the work surface. Top each slice 
with 1/3 cup banana mixture. Top with the remaining 
bread slices; press gently to seal the sandwiches. 
3. Place the sandwiches in a shallow baking dish 
(or 2 dishes) large enough to hold them in a single 
layer. Pour the egg mixture over the bread, and soak 
10 minutes. Carefully turn the sandwiches over, and 
soak 10 minutes more, or until the bread is soaked 
through. 
4. Reduce the oven temperature to 250 degrees F. Place a 
wire rack on a baking sheet; set aside. Heat the remaining 
banana mixture in a small skillet over 
medium-low heat until the sugar is melted and the 
bananas are soft and slightly translucent, about 3 
minutes. Add 4 tablespoons butter, and stir to combine; 
keep warm. 
594 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


5. Heat 2 tablespoons butter and 2 tablespoons vegetable 
oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Fry 
half of the sandwiches until golden brown, 2 to 3 
minutes per side. Transfer to the wire rack, and place 
in the oven while cooking the remaining sandwiches. 
Wipe out the skillet, and repeat with the remaining 
butter, oil, and bread. Keep in the oven until 
ready to serve. Cut into triangles, and serve with 
warm banana mixture and maple syrup, if desired. 
savory french toast 

SERVES 6 

5 ounces bacon (about 6 slices) 
2 onions, cut into   dice 


12 ounces button mushrooms, stemmed 
and quartered 


6 large eggs 

11/2 cups heavy cream, half-and-half, or milk 
1/2 cup grated Parmesan cheese 
(about 11/2 ounces), plus more for serving 
1 teaspoon coarse salt 

6  -thick slices bread, such as 
sourdough, each cut into 3 long strips, 
preferably day-old 


2 tablespoons unsalted butter 

2 tablespoons vegetable oil 

1. Heat a skillet over medium heat. Add the bacon; 
cook until browned, 3 to 4 minutes. Remove the 
bacon with tongs; drain on paper towels; set aside. 
Add the onions to the skillet with the bacon drippings; 
cook, stirring constantly, until the onions 
begin to soften, about 3 minutes. Add the mushrooms; 
cook until tender and most of the liquid released 
has evaporated, 5 to 6 minutes. Transfer the 
mixture to a bowl to cool. When cool, set aside half 
the mixture; finely chop the other half. 
2. Whisk together the eggs, cream, Parmesan, and 
salt in a medium bowl. Stir in the finely chopped 
vegetable mixture; set aside. 
3. Place the bread strips in a shallow baking dish 
large enough to hold them in a single layer. Pour 
the egg mixture over the bread; soak 10 minutes. 
Turn the strips over, and soak 10 minutes more, or 
until the bread is soaked through. 
4. Preheat the oven to 250 degrees F. Place a wire rack on 
a baking sheet; set aside. Heat 1 tablespoon butter 
and 1 tablespoon vegetable oil in a large skillet over 
medium heat. Fry half the bread strips until golden 
brown, 2 to 3 minutes per side. Transfer to the wire 
rack; place in the oven while cooking the remaining 
bread. 
5. Wipe out the skillet; repeat with the remaining 
butter, oil, and bread. Heat the remaining onion mixture 
in a small skillet until warm. Serve the French 
toast warm, topped with the remaining onion mixture, 
crumbled bacon, and Parmesan, if desired. 
cheese strata 

SERVES 6 

2 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted, plus 
more, softened, for the baking dish 


8 slices white bread 

11/2 cups grated sharp Cheddar cheese 

11/2 cups grated Swiss cheese 
2 tablespoons chopped fresh chives 

4 large eggs 

2 cups milk 

1/8 teaspoon cayenne pepper 

1 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 


1. Butter an 8-inch-square baking dish; line the bottom 
with 4 slices bread. Sprinkle with half of each 
cheese. Top with chives. Layer with the remaining 
bread and cheese. 
2. Whisk together the eggs, milk, melted butter, 
cayenne, salt, and pepper. Pour the mixture into the 
baking dish. Cover with plastic wrap; refrigerate 
at least 6 hours (or overnight). 
3. Preheat the oven to 325 degrees F. Bake the strata until 
puffed and golden, about 40 minutes. Let stand 10 
minutes before serving. 
BREAKFAST AND BRUNCH 595 


broccoli-cheese frittata 

SERVES 8 

2 heads broccoli (about 2 pounds) 

2 teaspoons unsalted butter 

2 small onions, peeled, cut into 
  pieces 


1 cup water 
11/2 teaspoons coarse salt 

1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 
Cooking spray 


3 large whole eggs 
9 large egg whites 


1/2 ounce grated Parmesan cheese (1/4 cup) 
2 ounces goat cheese (1/3 cup) 


1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Cut the broccoli stems 
into   pieces, and cut the florets into   
pieces; set aside. Melt the butter in a 1  saute 
pan over medium heat. Add the onions; cook until 
translucent, about 5 minutes. Add the broccoli 
stems, and cook until they begun to soften, about 
5 minutes. Add the florets and water, and cook until 
the broccoli is tender and the liquid has evaporated, 
about 5 minutes more. Season with salt and pepper. 
Transfer to a bowl to cool completely. 
2. Wipe out the pan; coat with cooking spray. In the 
bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the whisk attachment, 
combine the eggs and egg whites. Beat 
until extremely light and foamy, 8 to 10 minutes. Heat 
the pan over medium-high heat. Fold the Parmesan 
and the broccoli mixture into the eggs. Add to the 
pan; dot the top with goat cheese. Cook, without stirring, 
for 2 minutes. 
3. Transfer to the oven; bake until the top is golden 
brown and the frittata is set, about 30 minutes. Let 
cool 1 minute before sliding out of the pan. Serve hot 
or at room temperature. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 128 CALORIES, 

103 MG CALCIUM, 5 G FAT, 87 MG CHOLESTEROL, 

381 MG SODIUM, 12 G PROTEIN, 4 G FIBER 

ultimate streusel cake 

MAKES ONE 10-INCH CAKE 

21/2 cups all-purpose flour 

1 teaspoon baking soda 
1 teaspoon baking powder 


1/4 teaspoon coarse salt 

10 tablespoons (11/4 sticks) unsalted butter, 
room temperature, plus more for the pan 


1 cup granulated sugar 
3 large eggs 


1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 
11/4 cups sour cream (or 1 cup buttermilk) 

Pecan Streusel Filling (recipe follows) 
21/2 cups sifted confectioners' sugar 

1/4 cup milk 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Sift together the flour, 
baking soda, baking powder, and salt into a bowl; 
set aside. Butter a 10-inch Bundt pan (or other tube 
pan with 3-quart capacity); set aside. 
2. In the bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the 
paddle attachment, cream the butter and granulated 
sugar until light and fluffy, about 4 minutes. 
Add the eggs, 1 at a time, until well combined. Add 
the vanilla; stir until combined. Add the reserved 
flour mixture and sour cream, and stir just until well 
combined. Spoon half the batter into the bottom of 
the prepared pan. Make a well in the batter, and 
crumble 2/3 of the streusel mixture into the well. Top 
with the remaining batter, smoothing the top. Sprinkle 
the remaining streusel evenly over the top. Bake 
until golden brown and a cake tester comes out 
clean, about 1 hour. 
3. In a medium bowl, whisk together the confectioners' 
sugar and milk; set aside, covered with plastic 
wrap, until ready to use. Cool the cake until just 
warm before drizzling with icing. 
596 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


pecan streusel filling 

MAKES ENOUGH FOR ONE 10-INCH CAKE 

11/2 cups lightly packed light-brown sugar 

1/2 cup granulated sugar 
11/2 cups chopped pecans 

1/2 cup all-purpose flour 
1 tablespoon ground cinnamon 


Pinch of ground cloves 

8 tablespoons (1 stick) unsalted butter, 
softened 


Combine the sugars, pecans, flour, cinnamon, and 
cloves in a medium bowl. Using your hands or a 
pastry cutter, cut in the butter until well combined 
and crumbly; refrigerate until ready to use. 

breakfast blintzes 
with caramelized rhubarb 
and sour cream 


MAKES 12 

11 tablespoons butter (13/8 sticks), plus 
more for the pan 


1 cup all-purpose flour 

1/4 teaspoon salt 
1 cup plus 21/4 tablespoons sugar 


4 large eggs 
1 cup milk 


11/2 pounds trimmed rhubarb, cut into 
  lengths (about 5 cups) 

1/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons brandy 

1/2 pint sour cream, or more if desired 

1. Melt 2 tablespoons butter; let cool. 
2. Combine the flour, salt, 1/4 tablespoon sugar, eggs, 
milk, and 2 tablespoons reserved melted, cooled 
butter in the bowl of a food processor, and process 
until smooth. Transfer to a medium bowl, cover with 
plastic wrap, and place in the refrigerator at least 
1 hour or overnight. 
3. Fill a large bowl with ice and water; set aside. 
Melt the remaining 9 tablespoons butter in a large 
saute pan over medium heat. Sprinkle the remaining 
1 cup plus 2 tablespoons sugar over the butter; 
cook until the sugar has dissolved and starts to turn 
golden brown, about 5 minutes. Add the rhubarb; 
cook, shaking the pan vigorously to coat it in 
caramelized sugar, until the rhubarb is tender and 
just starting to fall apart, about 5 minutes. Add the 
brandy to the pan, shake the pan, and cook just until 
the liquid comes to a boil, about 30 seconds; remove 
from heat. Transfer the rhubarb to a small bowl; set 
into the ice bath to stop the cooking. 
4. Heat a 10-inch nonstick saute pan over medium 
heat. Melt about 1/2 tablespoon butter in the saute 
pan; swirl to coat. If the butter pools, gently wipe 
with a paper towel. Pour a scant 1/4 cup chilled batter 
into the hot saute pan. Swirl the pan to form a 
thin, even layer; cook the blintz until the bottom is 
very lightly browned, about 2 minutes. Do not turn 
over. Loosen the edge of the blintz with a spatula; 
slide out of the pan onto a piece of waxed paper. 
Continue making blintzes until all the batter is used 
(you may not need to add butter to the pan each 
time); place a piece of waxed paper between each. 
5. Transfer a blintz, cooked side up, onto a plate. 
Spoon a generous 1/4 cup rhubarb filling (getting a 
nice amount of fruit to liquid) into the center of the 
blintz. Carefully fold up the blintz, creating an envelope 
for the filling; set aside, seam up, on a baking 
sheet. Continue filling and folding until all the 
blintzes and filling have been used. 
6. Melt just enough butter to lightly coat the bottom 
of large saute pan (use the same nonstick saute 
pan or a slightly larger saute pan, if you wish, over 
medium-low heat). Arrange 2 or 3 filled blintzes at 
a time, depending on the size of the pan, in the 
saute pan; cook until the blintzes are golden and 
crisp on both sides, about 4 minutes per side. Serve 
immediately with sour cream. 
BREAKFAST AND BRUNCH 597 


blueberry blintzes 

MAKES 12; SERVES 6 

for the crepes 

3/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons whole milk 
5 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted 
2 large eggs 
1 cup plus 2 tablespoons all-purpose flour 


1/4 teaspoon coarse salt 
3 tablespoons canola oil 


Confectioners' sugar, for dusting 

for the sauce 

1 pint blueberries (about 2 cups) 
61/2 tablespoons granulated sugar 

1 tablespoon unsalted butter 
2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 


1/2 teaspoon cornstarch 
Pinch of coarse salt 


for the filling 

16 ounces cottage cheese 

4 ounces cream cheese, softened 
1/2 cup plus 3 tablespoons granulated sugar 


1 vanilla bean, halved lengthwise, seeds 
scraped and reserved, bean discarded 


1/2 pint blueberries (about 1 cup) 

1. Make the crepe batter: Whisk together milk, 1/2 
cup water, 2 tablespoons melted butter, and the eggs 
in a medium bowl. Whisk in flour and salt; set aside. 
2. Make the sauce: Combine blueberries, sugar, butter, 
lemon juice, cornstarch, and salt in a medium 
saucepan over medium-low heat. Bring mixture to 
a low boil. Reduce heat; simmer, stirring often, until 
berries begin to break down and release their juices, 
about 10 minutes. Set aside. 
3. Make the filling: Puree cottage cheese, cream 
cheese, sugar, and vanilla seeds in a food processor. 
Transfer to a medium bowl; stir in blueberries. 
4. Make the crepes: Stir together the remaining 
3 tablespoons melted butter and the oil in a small 
bowl; reserve 1/4 cup for cooking blintzes. Heat an 
8-inch nonstick skillet over medium heat. Lightly 
brush pan using remaining butter-oil mixture. Pour 
a scant 1/4 cup batter into pan; swirl to form an even 
layer. Cook until bottom is lightly browned, about 
11/2 minutes. Using a heatproof spatula, flip crepe; 
cook 30 seconds. Transfer to a plate. Repeat with 
remaining butter-oil mixture and batter. 

5. Transfer a crepe to a clean work surface. Spoon 
2 heaping tablespoons filling onto crepe 1 inch from 
bottom and sides. Fold bottom over filling. Fold in 
sides, and roll up. Set aside, seam down. Repeat with 
remaining crepes and filling. 
6. Heat the reserved 1/4 cup butter-oil mixture in a 
clean pan over medium heat. Working in batches 
of 3, fry blintzes, turning once, until golden and 
crisp, 2 to 21/2 minutes per side. Place 2 blintzes on 
each plate. Spoon warm sauce over top, and dust 
with confectioners' sugar. 
rachel good's glazed 
potato doughnuts 

MAKES ABOUT 36 

These are best eaten slightly warm. 

8 ounces russet potatoes, peeled and sliced 

1/4 cup warm water, plus 6 tablespoons water 
1 tablespoon active dry yeast 


1 cup milk, scalded 
1/4 cup solid vegetable shortening 


3/4 cup granulated sugar 
1 teaspoon salt 
2 large eggs, lightly beaten 

5 cups all-purpose flour, plus more, if 
needed, for the dough and work surface 


2 quarts vegetable oil, plus more 
for the bowl 


4 cups confectioners' sugar 
1 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 


1/2 teaspoon ground cinnamon 

1. Have ready 2 parchment-lined baking pans. 
Place the potatoes in a small saucepan, cover with 
cold water, and bring to a boil over high heat. Cook 
until tender, about 15 minutes. Drain in a colander. 
Pass the potatoes through a potato ricer or food 
mill and into a medium bowl; set aside. 
598 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


2. Place 1/4 cup warm water in a small bowl; sprinkle 
with the yeast, stir gently, and let stand until 
creamy, 5 to 10 minutes. Using an electric mixer fitted 
with the paddle attachment, combine the milk, 
shortening, 1/4 cup sugar, and salt. Let stand until 
cooled to just warm. Add the yeast mixture, reserved 
potatoes, and eggs; beat until combined. 
3. Switch to the dough hook. Add 5 cups flour, and 
mix on medium-low speed until combined, adding 
more flour if necessary, until a smooth and elastic 
dough is formed, about 5 minutes. Transfer the 
dough to a large, lightly greased bowl; cover. Let 
stand in a warm place until the dough is doubled 
in size, about 55 minutes. 
4. Transfer the dough to a lightly floured surface. 
Roll out to 1/2 inch thick. Using a 2 -diameter 
doughnut cutter, cut and place on prepared baking 
pans. Loosely cover with plastic wrap; let stand in 
a warm place until the dough has risen by about 
one-third, about 30 minutes. 
5. Combine the confectioners' sugar, vanilla, and 
remaining 6 tablespoons water in a medium bowl, 
stirring until smooth; set aside. In a medium bowl, 
whisk together the remaining 1/2 cup granulated 
sugar and cinnamon until well combined; set aside. 
6. In a large, low-sided saucepan over medium heat, 
heat the oil until a deep-fry thermometer registers 
375 degrees  F. Drop the doughnuts into the oil; fry in 
batches until golden, 1 to 2 minutes per side. Transfer 
to several layers of paper towel to drain. Place 
the drained doughnuts on a wire rack set over a baking 
pan. Dip half the doughnuts in the glaze; return 
to the wire rack. Roll the remaining doughnuts in 
the cinnamon-sugar mixture until well coated. 
applesauce coffee cake 

MAKES ONE 10-INCH CAKE 

Vegetable oil cooking spray 

12 tablespoons (11/2 sticks) unsalted 
butter, softened 


1/2 cup packed dark-brown sugar 

1/4 cup old-fashioned rolled oats 
23/4 teaspoons ground cinnamon 

1 teaspoon salt 
11/2 cups chopped toasted pecans 

2 cups all-purpose flour 
1 teaspoon baking soda 


1/2 teaspoon freshly grated nutmeg 
1/8 teaspoon ground cloves 


1 cup granulated sugar 
1/2 cup packed light-brown sugar 


4 large eggs 

Apple Cider Applesauce (page 560) 
or 11/2 cups store-bought applesauce 


2 McIntosh apples, peeled, cored, and cut 
into   thick wedges 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Coat a 10-inch angel-
food-cake pan with cooking spray; set aside. Make 
the crumb topping: Stir together 4 tablespoons 
butter, the dark-brown sugar, oats, 3/4 teaspoon 
cinnamon, and 1/4 teaspoon salt until smooth. Stir 
in 1/2 cup pecans; set aside. 
2. Make the batter: Sift the flour, baking soda, nutmeg, 
cloves, and remaining 2 teaspoons cinnamon 
and 3/4 teaspoon salt; set aside. Put the remaining 
8 tablespoons (1 stick) butter, the granulated sugar, 
and the light-brown sugar in the bowl of an electric 
mixer fitted with the paddle attachment. Cream on 
medium speed until smooth, about 3 minutes. Mix 
in the eggs, 1 at a time. Reduce speed to low; mix in 
the applesauce and then the flour mixture. Stir in 
the remaining cup nuts by hand. 
3. Pour the batter into the oiled pan; sprinkle the 
reserved crumb topping over the batter. Lay the apples 
on top, tucking some into the batter. 
4. Bake until a cake tester inserted near the center 
comes out clean, about 1 hour and 10 minutes. Let 
cool in the pan on a wire rack. Store at room temperature, 
covered with plastic wrap, up to 3 days. 
BREAKFAST AND BRUNCH 599 


zucchini pie 

SERVES 6 

If yellow zucchini are unavailable, you can use all 
green zucchini to make this pie. 

2 teaspoons olive oil 

1 pound (about 2 or 3) green zucchini, 
cut into   pieces 


4 scallions, thinly sliced 

4 garlic cloves, minced 

1 teaspoon dried marjoram 

1 teaspoon coarse salt 

1/2 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 

1 pound (about 2 or 3) yellow zucchini, 
cut into   pieces 


1/2 cup chopped fresh dill 

1/4 cup chopped fresh flat-leaf parsley 

5 large eggs plus 5 large egg whites, 
lightly beaten 


1 tomato, thinly sliced 

2 ounces low-fat feta cheese, crumbled 

1. Preheat the oven to 325 degrees F. Heat 1 teaspoon olive 
oil in a large skillet set over medium heat. Add the 
green zucchini, half the scallions, half the garlic, 
1/2 teaspoon marjoram, 1/2 teaspoon salt, and 1/4 teaspoon 
pepper; cook, stirring frequently, until the 
zucchini has softened and is beginning to brown, 
about 5 minutes. Remove from heat; transfer to a 
large bowl; set aside. 
2. Rinse the skillet; repeat the process with the yellow 
zucchini and remaining teaspoon olive oil, scallions, 
garlic, 1/2 teaspoon marjoram, 1/2 teaspoon salt, 
and 1/4 teaspoon pepper. Transfer to the bowl with 
the cooked green zucchini; let sit until cooled. 
Drain, and discard any liquid. 
3. Add the dill, parsley, and eggs to the zucchini; 
stir to combine. Pour into a 9  round deep 
baking dish. Cover with the tomato; sprinkle with 
the feta. Bake until set, about 1 hour. Serve hot or at 
room temperature. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 146 CALORIES, 

8 G FAT, 186 MG CHOLESTEROL, 8 G CARBOHYDRATE, 

336 MG SODIUM, 12 G PROTEIN, 1 G FIBER 

pan-fried potato 
and fontina frittata 

SERVES 6 

1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil 

1 tablespoon unsalted butter 

3/4 pound fingerling or other small potatoes, 
cut into  -thick pieces 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1/4 cup chopped mixed fresh herbs 
(such as parsley, rosemary, thyme, and 
sage), plus more for garnish 


10 large eggs 

8 ounces fontina cheese, grated 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Heat the oil and butter 
in a 10-inch ovenproof nonstick skillet over 
medium heat. Add the potatoes; season with salt 
and pepper. Cook, stirring occasionally, until the 
potatoes are tender and golden brown, 12 to 15 minutes. 
Stir in the herbs. 
2. Meanwhile, whisk the eggs in a medium bowl; 
season with salt and pepper. Stir in the cheese; pour 
the mixture over the potatoes. Stir until the eggs 
begin to set slightly, about 30 seconds. Without stirring, 
continue cooking until the eggs are set on the 
sides and bottom, about 2 minutes. Transfer to the 
oven; bake until just set, 12 to 15 minutes. 
3. Slide the frittata onto a serving platter, or let cool 
and slide into a 10-inch pie plate (and cover with a 
second pie plate) for easy transport. Serve garnished 
with chopped herbs, if desired. 
600 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


poached eggs with bacon 
and toasted pecan pancakes 

SERVES 2 

1/2 cup all-purpose flour 

1/3 cup whole-wheat flour 
5 teaspoons sugar 


11/2 teaspoons baking powder 
Coarse salt 

3/4 cup nonfat buttermilk 
3 large eggs 
1/2 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 

11/2 teaspoons unsalted butter, melted, plus 
1 teaspoon for skillet 

1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon vegetable oil 

1/2 cup pecans, toasted and coarsely 
chopped (about 2 ounces) 


6 strips thick-cut bacon 
Pure maple syrup, warmed, for serving 


Toasted Glazed Pecans, for garnish 
(recipe follows) 


1. Preheat the oven to 200 degrees F. Whisk flours, sugar, 
baking powder, and 1/4 teaspoon salt in a large bowl; 
set aside. Whisk together buttermilk, 1 egg, vanilla, 
melted butter, and 1 tablespoon oil; whisk into flour 
mixture. Using a rubber spatula, fold in chopped 
pecans; set batter aside. 
2. Cook bacon in a medium skillet over medium 
heat, turning once, until crisp, 6 to 7 minutes per 
side. Let drain on paper towels. Transfer bacon to 
a baking sheet in oven to keep warm. 
3. Heat 1 teaspoon butter and remaining teaspoon 
oil in a medium nonstick skillet over medium heat. 
Working in batches of 2, pour in 1/4 cup batter for 
each pancake. Cook until small bubbles form, 21/2 
to 3 minutes. Flip; cook until golden brown, about 
2 minutes. Transfer to baking sheet in oven to keep 
warm until ready to serve. 
4. Fill a small, high-sided skillet with 11/2 inches 
water; heat over medium heat until barely simmering. 
Break remaining eggs into separate cups; 
pour eggs into water. Cook, basting tops of eggs 
with the simmering water, until set, 2 to 3 minutes. 
Using a slotted spoon, transfer eggs to several layers 
of paper towel to drain. 
5. Place 2 pancakes on each plate; drizzle with 
warm syrup. Arrange bacon over pancakes, and 
place a poached egg on top. Drizzle with more 
syrup, if desired, and a sprinkle of salt. Garnish with 
toasted glazed pecans. 
toasted glazed pecans 

MAKES 1/3 CUP 

1/3 cup pecan halves 
2 teaspoons lightly beaten egg white 
1 teaspoon pure maple syrup 
1 teaspoon vegetable oil 


Pinch of coarse salt 

1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees  F. Toast pecans on a 
rimmed baking sheet, shaking pan occasionally, 
until fragrant, 3 to 4 minutes. 
2. Whisk together egg white, syrup, oil, and salt in 
a small bowl. Add pecans; toss to coat. Spread 
evenly on baking sheet; return to oven, and toast, 
stirring occasionally, 8 minutes. Let cool completely. 
BREAKFAST AND BRUNCH 601 


muesli with yogurt 

SERVES 8 

The muesli can be stored in an airtight container 
at room temperature for up to 1 week. 

11/2 cups old-fashioned rolled oats 

1/4 cup wheat germ 
1/4 cup dried currants 


1/4 cup dried apricots, finely chopped 
1/3 cup whole raw almonds, toasted 
and coarsely chopped 
1/3 cup sunflower seeds, toasted 


4 cups (32 ounces) plain low-fat yogurt 

1 small apple, halved, cored, and cut 
into  -thick slices 


2 tablespoons plus 2 teaspoons honey 

1. Stir together oats, wheat germ, currants, apricots, 
almonds, and sunflower seeds in a medium bowl. 
2. For each serving, top 1/2 cup yogurt with 1/4 cup 
muesli; arrange apple slices on top. Drizzle with 1 
teaspoon honey. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 277 CALORIES, 9 G FAT, 

7 MG CHOLESTEROL, 38 G CARBOHYDRATE, 81 MG SODIUM, 

12 G PROTEIN, 5 G FIBER 

blueberry-walnut muesli 

MAKES ABOUT 3 CUPS 

Serve with yogurt, berries, and a drizzle of honey. 

11/2 cups old-fashioned oats 

3/4 cup dried blueberries 
1/2 cup coarsely chopped walnuts, toasted 
1/3 cup sunflower seeds, toasted 


1/4 cup wheat germ 
2 tablespoons flaxseed 


Stir together all ingredients in a large bowl. The 
muesli can be stored in an airtight container until 
ready to serve, up to 1 week. 

eggs and morels baked in cream 

SERVES 4 

1 tablespoon unsalted butter, plus more 
for dishes 


1 small shallot, finely chopped 

8 fresh morel mushrooms (about 1 cup), 
halved lengthwise 


Coarse salt 

1 cup heavy cream 

4 large eggs 

Freshly ground pepper 

1 tablespoon finely chopped fresh chives 

Crusty bread, for serving 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees  F. Melt butter in a 
medium skillet over medium-low heat. Add shallot. 
Cook, stirring constantly, until shallot has softened, 
about 2 minutes. Add mushrooms and a pinch of 
salt. Cook, stirring occasionally, until mushrooms 
have softened, about 5 minutes. Add cream; bring 
to a simmer. Immediately remove from heat, and 
let mushroom mixture cool 5 minutes. 
2. Butter four 6-inch shallow baking dishes (such 
as gratin dishes). Place dishes on a rimmed baking 
sheet. Crack 1 egg into each baking dish, keeping 
yolks intact, and season with salt and pepper. Pour 
the mushroom-cream mixture into dishes, dividing 
evenly, and sprinkle with chives. Bake on baking 
sheet until the egg whites are just set, 9 to 12 minutes. 
Serve with bread, for dipping. 
602 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


cornmeal waffles 
with apricot-cherry compote 


MAKES 6 

8 ounces creme fraiche 

1/4 cup confectioners' sugar 
11/4 cups all-purpose flour 

3/4 cup coarse yellow cornmeal 
3 tablespoons plus 1 teaspoon 
granulated sugar 


4 teaspoons baking powder 
1 teaspoon salt 


2 large eggs 
11/2 cups low-fat buttermilk 

1/2 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 
1/3 cup vegetable oil 


5 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted 
Apricot-Cherry Compote (recipe follows) 


1. Whisk together creme fraiche and confectioners' 
sugar in a small bowl. Refrigerate until ready 
to use (up to overnight). 
2. Whisk together flour, cornmeal, granulated 
sugar, baking powder, and salt in a large bowl. 
Whisk eggs, buttermilk, and vanilla in a small bowl. 
Add egg mixture to flour mixture; stir until combined. 
Add oil and butter; whisk until smooth. 
3. Heat a waffle iron (preferably Belgian-style). 
Ladle 1/2 cup batter into each mold. Cook according 
to manufacturer's instructions until golden brown. 
Place waffles on a baking sheet in a 200 degrees F oven to 
keep warm while you make the rest. Serve topped 
with compote and sweetened creme fraiche. 
apricot-cherry compote 

MAKES ABOUT 3 CUPS 

1 pound apricots, quartered 

1 cup sugar 
2 teaspoons fresh lemon juice 


Pinch of salt 

1/2 pound Bing cherries, pitted and halved 
(or use whole frozen cherries) 


Put apricots, sugar, 2 tablespoons water, the lemon 
juice, and salt into a medium saucepan. Cover; bring 
to a simmer over medium heat, stirring occasionally. 
Cook until apricots have softened. Stir in cherries. 
Serve warm or at room temperature. 

souffleed omelet with goat 
cheese, asparagus, and ham 


SERVES 4 

4 asparagus spears 

1/2 tablespoon unsalted butter 
5 large eggs, separated, room temperature 


2 tablespoons all-purpose flour 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


21/2 tablespoons soft goat cheese 
21/2 tablespoons thinly sliced fresh mint 

4 paper-thin slices serrano ham (about 
1 ounce) 


1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Prepare an ice-water 
bath. Bring a wide medium saucepan of water to a 
boil. Add the asparagus; cook until bright green 
and just tender, 2 to 3 minutes. Plunge asparagus 
into the ice bath to stop the cooking; cool completely. 
Drain; halve lengthwise. Set aside. 
2. Melt butter in a 1  ovenproof nonstick skillet 
over medium heat. Remove skillet from heat; set 
aside. Whisk together egg yolks, flour, 1/2 teaspoon 
salt, and 1/4 teaspoon pepper in a medium bowl until 
pale and thick; set aside. 
3. Put egg whites and a pinch of salt into the bowl 
of an electric mixer fitted with the whisk attachment. 
Beat on medium-high speed until stiff peaks 
form. Fold whites into yolk mixture. Using a large 
rubber spatula, spread mixture evenly into reserved 
skillet. Bake until omelet is almost set but still soft, 
about 6 minutes. 
4. Sprinkle goat cheese and mint over half the 
omelet. Top with asparagus and a layer of ham. Fold 
plain half over filled half. Bake until cheese has 
melted and omelet is cooked through, about 3 minutes. 
Cut into 4 wedges, and serve. 
BREAKFAST AND BRUNCH 603 






healthy pepper hash 

SERVES 6 

1 tablespoon unsalted butter 

1 red onion, cut into   dice 

2 garlic cloves, minced 

1 carrot, peeled and cut into   dice 

1 medium Idaho potato (about 9 ounces) 

3 assorted bell peppers, seeds removed, 
cut into   dice 


6 ounces button mushrooms, stems 
trimmed, cut into   pieces 


8 ounces ground turkey 

2 tablespoons all-purpose flour 
1/4 cup dry sherry 


2 cups homemade or low-sodium store- 
bought chicken stock, skimmed of fat 


1 teaspoon coarse salt 

1/4 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper 
1/4 teaspoon chili powder 


1/4 teaspoon paprika 

2 tablespoons finely chopped fresh 
flat-leaf parsley 


6 large eggs (optional), poached or fried in 
a nonstick skillet with cooking spray 


1. Heat the butter in a large nonstick saute pan over 
medium-high heat. Add the onion, garlic, and carrot. 
Peel the potato, and then cut into   dice. 
Add to the pan. Cook until the vegetables soften 
and begin to brown, 6 to 7 minutes. 
2. Reduce heat to medium; add the bell peppers 
and mushrooms, and cook until the vegetables are 
just tender, 8 to 10 minutes. 
3. Add the turkey; saute until cooked through. 
Sprinkle with the flour; stir to combine. 
4. Add the sherry; scrape any browned bits from 
the pan. Cook until most of the liquid has evaporated. 
Add the stock, salt, black pepper, chili powder, 
and paprika; bring to a boil. Reduce to a 
simmer; cook until the liquid thickens and reduces 
by half. Stir in the parsley. Serve hot, topped with 
egg, if using. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 243 CALORIES, 

11 G FAT, 249 MG CHOLESTEROL, 18 G CARBOHYDRATE, 

309 MG SODIUM, 16 G PROTEIN, 3 G FIBER 

slab bacon and 
cheddar cheese broiled grits 


SERVES 4 

1/4 pound slab bacon, diced 

2 cups whole milk 
1 cup stone-ground grits 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 
13/4 cups grated extra-sharp Cheddar cheese 

1. Scatter bacon in a dry skillet. Cook over medium-
high heat until barely crisp, about 4 minutes. Use 
a slotted spoon to transfer bacon to a paper towel-
lined plate. Reserve 1 tablespoon bacon fat. 
2. Combine milk and 2 cups water in a medium 
saucepan. Cover, and cook over medium-high until 
boiling, about 5 minutes. Add grits and 3/4 teaspoon 
salt. Reduce heat to medium. Cook, stirring constantly 
until grits thicken, about 8 minutes. Reduce 
heat to low; simmer, stirring every 2 to 3 minutes, 
until thick, about 20 minutes. Cook, stirring constantly, 
until creamy and soft, about 15 minutes 
more. Remove from heat. 
3. Heat the broiler. Stir in 1/2 teaspoon pepper, 
reserved bacon and bacon fat (if desired), and 
11/4 cups cheese, and stir. Transfer to a small baking 
dish or cast-iron skillet, and scatter with remaining 
1/2 cup cheese. Broil until cheese is brown, about 
3 minutes. Serve hot. 
604 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 








limeade 

MAKES ABOUT 2 QUARTS; SERVES 6 TO 8 

For spiked drinks, pour 1 ounce vodka over ice 
into each glass before topping with limeade. 

1 cup sugar 

11/2 cups fresh lime juice, plus lime wedges, 
for garnish (14 to 16 limes total) 

1. Heat the sugar and 1 cup water in a small 
saucepan over medium heat, stirring, until the sugar 
has dissolved, 5 to 6 minutes. 
2. Stir together the lime juice and 5 cups water in 
a large pitcher; stir in the sugar syrup. Refrigerate 
until cold (or up to 2 days in an airtight container). 
Garnish each serving with a lime wedge. 






orange lemonade 

MAKES 7 CUPS 

To make a fizzy version of this recipe, use seltzer 
or sparkling water. 

3/4 cup sugar 
11/2 cups water 
4 cups fresh orange juice 
(about 12 oranges) 


11/2 cups fresh lemon juice 
(about 9 lemons) 

Ice, for serving 

2 oranges, washed and thinly sliced 
1 lemon, washed and thinly sliced 


1. Make the sugar syrup: Combine the sugar and 
the water in a small saucepan over medium heat, 
and stir until all the sugar has dissolved. Remove 
from heat, and let cool completely. (To cool the 
syrup more quickly, plunge the saucepan in an ice-
water bath, and stir frequently until cool.) 
2. Combine the sugar syrup, orange juice, and 
lemon juice in a large pitcher or punchbowl. Stir 
to combine. Add the ice and sliced oranges and 
lemons, and serve immediately. 





ginger beer

MAKES 16 CUPS 

This ginger beer is very spicy. Adjust the amount 
of lime juice and sugar to your taste. 

2 pounds ginger, cut into   pieces 

1 gallon boiling water 
11/2 cups fresh lime juice (about 8 limes) 

11/2 cups superfine sugar 

Place the ginger in the bowl of a food processor, 
and process until finely chopped. Transfer to a large 
pot or bowl, and add the boiling water. Allow to 
stand for 1 hour. Drain through a fine sieve lined 
with a double thickness of damp cheesecloth. Discard 
the solids. Add the lime juice and sugar, and 
stir to dissolve. 








creamy orange shakes 

SERVES 2 

1 cup ice cubes 

1 tablespoon finely grated orange zest 

1/2 cup plus 1 tablespoon fresh orange juice 
(1 to 2 medium oranges total) 


3/4 cup vanilla ice cream 
1/2 cup orange sherbet 

1/2 cup milk 

1/2 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 

Blend all the ingredients in a blender until the ice 
is crushed and the mixture is smooth. Divide between 
2 glasses. 

606 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 







peach tea punch 

MAKES 21/2 QUARTS 

Almost any type of fruit nectar can be substituted 
for peach with equally delectable results. We especially 
like the exotic flavor of mango. 

3 tea bags 

6 cups boiling water 
4 cups peach nectar 


1 bunch mint, trimmed and rinsed well 
2 lemons, washed and thinly sliced 


Ice cubes, for serving 

1. Brew the tea bags in the boiling water to make a 
strong tea. Discard the tea bags, and place the tea 
in refrigerator until chilled. 
2. Combine the tea with the peach nectar in a large 
serving bowl or pitcher. Add the mint and lemon 
slices; let stand about 1 hour in the refrigerator to 
infuse the flavors. Add ice cubes, and serve. 











hibiscus and ginger iced tea 

SERVES 8 

If any drink was made for leisurely back-porch 
sipping, it's iced tea. Our version is brewed from 
zesty hibiscus tea, which is made from coppery-
red hibiscus leaves and is naturally caffeine free. 
Ginger syrup and lemon juice add layers of flavor. 

1 tablespoon thinly sliced peeled 
fresh ginger 


3/4 cup sugar 
4 hibiscus tea bags 
2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 
Lemon wedges, for garnish 


1. Put 4 cups water, ginger, and 3/4 cup sugar into a 
medium saucepan. Bring to a boil over medium-
high heat, stirring until sugar has dissolved. Remove 
from heat; add tea bags. Cover, and let steep 
15 minutes. 
2. Pour through a fine sieve into a bowl set in an ice-
water bath. Let cool. Stir in the lemon juice. Serve 
over crushed ice, and garnish with lemon wedges. 







papaya-ginger smoothie 

SERVES 4 

21/2 cups papaya (Solo or Mexican) chunks 

1 cup ice cubes 
2/3 cup plain nonfat yogurt 


1 tablespoon finely chopped peeled 
fresh ginger 


1 tablespoon honey 

Juice of 2 lemons 

16 fresh mint leaves, plus 4 sprigs 
for garnish 


1. Refrigerate the papaya until very cold, at least 
1 hour or overnight. 
2. Blend the papaya, ice, yogurt, ginger, honey, and 
lemon juice in a blender. Add up to 1/4 cup water, 
1 tablespoon at a time, until the mixture is smooth 
and thinned to desired consistency. Blend in the 
mint leaves. Garnish with mint sprigs. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 102 CALORIES, 0 G FAT, 

3 MG CHOLESTEROL, 22 G CARBOHYDRATE, 53 MG SODIUM, 

7 G PROTEIN, 2 G FIBER 








sparkling fresh lemonade 

SERVES 10 

1 cup sugar 
2 cups fresh lemon juice (about 10 lemons) 


3 cups cold sparkling water 
41/2 cups ice 

1. Bring 1 cup water and the sugar to a boil in a 
small saucepan, stirring until the sugar is dissolved. 
Let cool completely; refrigerate until ready to use. 
2. Put the syrup, lemon juice, and sparkling water 
in a pitcher. Stir in the ice. 
DRINKS 607 









pineapple-mint juice 

SERVES 5 OR 6 

1 pineapple, peeled, cored, and 
coarsely chopped (about 6 cups) 


5 cups ice, plus more for the glasses 

1/4 cup sugar 

1/2 cup loosely packed fresh mint, plus 
sprigs for garnish (optional) 


Puree the pineapple in a blender until smooth. Pour 
the puree through a fine sieve into a bowl; discard 
the solids. Return half the juice to the blender; blend 
with half the ice and sugar. Add half the mint; pulse 
to combine. Transfer to a pitcher; repeat with the 
remaining ingredients. Just before serving, stir mixture 
and pour into ice-filled glasses. Garnish with 
mint sprigs, if desired. 








buttermilk-banana smoothies 

SERVES 2 

1 cup low-fat buttermilk 

2 ripe bananas, cut into  -thick rounds 

11 dried pitted dates 

1 teaspoon honey 

Pinch of salt 

1 cup ice 

Blend all the ingredients in a blender on high speed 
until the mixture is smooth and the ice is finely 
ground. Pour into 2 glasses. 

FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 294 CALORIES, 2 G FAT, 

5 MG CHOLESTEROL, 70 G CARBOHYDRATE, 277 MG SODIUM, 

6 G PROTEIN, 6 G FIBER 








honeydew granita spritzer 

SERVES 6 

Seltzer enlivens this effervescent drink, which 
consists of sweet honeydew melon puree and 
mouth-puckering lime juice. 

6 cups cubed honeydew melon (about 
half of a medium melon) 


1/3 cup sugar 

1/4 cup fresh lime juice 
Lime peels, for garnish 


1. Working in batches, puree the melon in a blender. 
Pour the puree through a fine sieve into an 8-inch 
square nonreactive dish. 
2. Put sugar and 1/2 cup water into a small saucepan. 
Bring to a boil over medium-high heat, stirring until 
sugar has dissolved. Stir into melon puree. Add lime 
juice; stir to combine. Freeze, covered with plastic 
wrap, at least 6 hours (or up to 3 days). 
3. Scrape granita with a fork; spoon about 1 cup 
granita into each of 6 glasses. Pour 1/2 cup seltzer 
into each glass; garnish with lime peels. 
spiced pomegranate punch 

SERVES 6 

5 pomegranates 
1 cup apple cider 
1/2 cinnamon stick 


1 tablespoon thinly sliced fresh ginger 

1/4 cup fresh orange juice, plus strips of 
orange zest for garnish 


1. Cut pomegranates in half. Extract juice from 
seeds with a citrus juicer or reamer. Strain into a 
medium saucepan (you should have about 21/2 cups). 
2. Add cider, 2 cups water, the cinnamon stick, and 
ginger. Cook over high heat until simmering, 5 to 
6 minutes. Reduce heat; gently simmer 15 minutes. 
Skim any foam that rises to the surface. 
3. Discard cinnamon and ginger. Stir in orange 
juice. Serve warm, garnished with orange zest. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 113 CALORIES, 0 G SAT


URATED FAT, 0 G UNSATURATED FAT, 0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 

28 G CARBOHYDRATE, 8 MG SODIUM, 1 G PROTEIN, 1 G FIBER 

608 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


COCKTAILS 


cranberry, tangerine, and 
pomegranate champagne punch 

SERVES ABOUT 20 

1 package (12 ounces) fresh cranberries, 
for the swizzle sticks 


1 bunch fresh mint, for the swizzle sticks 

2 cups pomegranate juice (about 5 
pomegranates) 


3 cups fresh tangerine juice (about 7 
tangerines) 


5 cups cranberry juice cocktail 

2 bottles (750 ml each) chilled champagne 
or other sparkling wine 


1. To make the swizzle sticks, spear 3 cranberries 
alternately with 2 mint leaves on wooden skewers. 
Place the skewers on a baking sheet; cover with 
damp paper towels, and refrigerate up to 1 hour. 
2. In a large punchbowl or pitcher, stir together the 
fruit juices. Fill glasses with ice, and ladle or pour 
about 1/2 cup punch into each glass; top with champagne. 
Garnish each glass with a swizzle stick. 
latin lover 

SERVES 2 

Pineapple and coconut rum give this drink the 
taste of the tropics. 

1/4 cup frozen pineapple juice concentrate 

2 tablespoons frozen orange juice 
concentrate 


2 tablespoons frozen cranberry 
juice concentrate 


1 tablespoon fresh lime juice 
1/4 cup coconut rum 


11/2 cups small ice cubes 
Fresh sugarcane, for garnish 

Mix all ingredients (except sugarcane) in a blender 
until smooth. Serve, garnished with sugarcane. 

rose sangria 

SERVES 6 

Chanterais melons, also called Cavaillon, are a 
delicious alternative to cantaloupes. Look for 
them at farmers' markets and gourmet stores. 

1 bottle (750 ml) French dry rose wine, 
such as Tavel or Bandol 


6 tablespoons creme de cassis 
(black currant liqueur) 


1 Chanterais melon or 1/2 large cantaloupe, 
cut into chunks 

1 peach or nectarine, pitted and cut 
into 8 wedges 


1/2 pint blackberries or raspberries 

1 bottle (750 ml) sparkling water 

Stir together all the ingredients except the 
sparkling water in a large pitcher. Refrigerate at 
least 1 hour or until ready to serve, up to 3 hours. 
Stir in the sparkling water, and serve over ice. 

orange cloud 

SERVES 2 

Like a creamy orange ice-cream pop, this cocktail 
marries vanilla and orange. But the drink includes 
two liqueurs, so it's for adults only. 

1/4 cup frozen orange juice concentrate 
1 tablespoon heavy cream 


2 tablespoons Cointreau 
2 tablespoons Galliano 


11/2 cups small ice cubes 

Mix all the ingredients in a blender until smooth. 
Dip the moistened rims of 2 glasses in orange-
colored sugar; pour in the orange mixture, and serve. 

DRINKS 609 


watermelon-tequila refreshers 

SERVES 6 TO 8 

If you prefer to serve alcohol-free cocktails, omit 
the tequila-the drink is still delicious. 

3/4 cup sugar 
31/2 pounds seedless watermelon, cut into 
  cubes (about 12 cups) 

1 cup tequila 

1 cup fresh lime juice (6 to 8 limes), plus 
lime slices for garnish 


4 cups ice 

1. Stir together the sugar and 3/4 cup water in a 
medium saucepan. Bring to a boil over medium-
high heat, stirring until the sugar is dissolved. Let 
cool completely. Refrigerate until ready to use, up 
to 1 week. 
2. Working in batches, fill the blender with watermelon 
cubes; blend until smooth. Pass the puree in 
batches through a fine sieve set over a large bowl, 
discarding the solids as you work. Refrigerate the 
juice until ready to use, up to 1 day. 
3. Stir together the tequila, lime and watermelon 
juices, and sugar syrup in a large pitcher. Stir in the 
ice and lime slices. 
mango cooler 

SERVES 2 

We love our sweet twist on a daiquiri: mango 
mixed with dark rum, sugar syrup, and lemon 
juice (in place of the traditional lime). 

1 cup chopped mango, frozen until hard 

3 tablespoons dark rum 

2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 

1 tablespoon Simple Syrup (page 660) 
11/2 cups small ice cubes 

Diced mango and shredded fresh mint, 

for garnish 

Mix all the ingredients (except mango and mint) in 
a blender until smooth. Serve, garnished with 
mango and mint. 








caipirinhas 

SERVES 6 

Cachaca is a potent sugarcane liquor. If you can't 
find it, use light rum instead. 

3 limes, halved 
1/4 cup sugar 
11/2 cups cachaca 

Place a lime half in each of 6 tumblers, and sprinkle 
each with 2 teaspoons sugar. Using a wooden 
reamer, crush the flesh of the limes. Fill the glasses 
with crushed ice, and divide the cachaca evenly 
among them. Stir well, and serve. 










grapefruit sparkler 

SERVES 8 

1 cup sugar 
8 whole star anise 
6 cups ruby red grapefruit juice, chilled 


1/3 cup Campari 
2 cups champagne, chilled 


1. In a small saucepan, combine 1 cup water with 
the sugar and star anise; bring to a boil, stirring occasionally, 
until the sugar has dissolved. Remove 
the pan from the heat; let cool completely. 
2. Pour the mixture through a fine sieve into a measuring 
cup (to yield 1 cup); discard the star anise. 
Cover the syrup with plastic wrap, and chill. 
3. In a large pitcher, combine the grapefruit juice, 
Campari, and chilled syrup. Divide among 8 
glasses; top with champagne. Serve immediately. 








portofino cocktail 

SERVES 1 

1 tablespoon Campari 

1/4 cup fresh red grapefruit juice 
6 tablespoons tonic water 
1 red grapefruit slice, for garnish 


Fill a tumbler with ice. Shake the Campari, grapefruit 
juice, and tonic in a cocktail shaker. Pour into 
the tumbler, and garnish with the grapefruit slice. 

610 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 







lime-apricot rum cooler 

SERVES 4 

2 tablespoons freshly grated lime zest 
(about 6 limes) 


6 tablespoons sugar 

1/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons freshly squeezed 
lime juice (about 3 limes) 


2 cups apricot nectar, chilled 
11/4 cups white rum 

1. In a food processor, pulse the lime zest with the 
sugar until finely ground. Measure out 1/4 cup mixture; 
transfer the rest to a shallow dish. Pour 2 tablespoons 
lime juice into another dish. Dip the rims 
of 4 glasses in the juice, then in the sugar mixture, 
coating well. 
2. In a blender, puree the apricot nectar, rum, remaining 
1/4 cup lime juice, reserved 1/4 cup zest mixture, 
and 2 cups ice. Divide among the prepared 
glasses, and serve immediately. 








strawberry-ginger caipirosca 

SERVES 2 

10 fresh strawberries, hulled and quartered 

30 fresh mint leaves 
1/4 lime, cut into 4 pieces 

1 teaspoon freshly grated ginger 
2 tablespoons sugar 


2 cups cracked ice 
1/2 cup vodka 


Place the berries, mint, lime, and ginger in a cocktail 
shaker. Sprinkle the sugar over top; muddle the 
mixture with a long spoon until almost pureed. Add 
the ice and vodka; shake well. Divide between 2 
glasses; serve immediately. 










honeydew fizz 

SERVES 2 

1/2 large honeydew melon (about 3 pounds) 

1/2 cup Midori or other melon liqueur 
1 cup seltzer water, chilled 


1. With a large spoon, scrape out and discard the 
honeydew seeds. Using a   melon baller, 
scoop out 10 balls; place in a large sealable plastic 
container. Pour the Midori over the melon balls; 
transfer to the freezer, and let macerate about 1 hour. 
2. Meanwhile, place the remaining honeydew in a 
blender, and puree until smooth. Let stand until the 
juice settles to the bottom of the blender and the 
foam rises to the top. Skim off the foam, and measure 
out 1/2 cup juice. 
3. Remove the honeydew-ball mixture from the 
freezer; stir in the juice and seltzer. Divide evenly 
between 2 cocktail glasses; serve immediately. 









plum and pineapple sangria 

MAKES ABOUT 21/4 QUARTS 

1 pineapple 

4 plums, preferably a variety, 
pitted and sliced 


1 tablespoon superfine sugar, plus 
more as needed 


3 ounces Cointreau 
3 ounces brandy 


1 750-ml bottle fruity red wine, chilled 
11/3 cups pineapple juice 

1 cup sparkling water 

1. Peel pineapple; halve lengthwise and remove 
core. Cut half the pineapple into   spears; cut 
the other half into   chunks. Place in a pitcher 
with the plums; sprinkle with sanding sugar, and 
stir to combine. Add Cointreau and brandy; let sit 
at least 1 hour. 
2. When ready to serve, stir in red wine, pineapple 
juice, and sparkling water. Add more sugar, if desired. 
Serve chilled. 
DRINKS 611 







white-wine sangria 

MAKES ABOUT 2 QUARTS 

1 cup seedless green grapes 

1 kiwi, peeled and sliced 

1 pound seedless watermelon, scooped 
into   balls 


1/4 honeydew melon, seeded and cut 
into   cubes 


1 lime, sliced and seeded 

1 star fruit, sliced and seeded 

1 pink grapefruit, seeded, sliced, 
and quartered 


1 tablespoon superfine sugar, plus 
more if needed 


3 ounces Cointreau 
3 ounces brandy 


1 750-ml bottle fruity white wine, chilled 
1 cup cranberry juice 


1. Put all fruit in a pitcher; sprinkle with superfine 
sugar, and stir to combine. Add Cointreau and 
brandy; let sit at least 1 hour. 
2. When ready to serve, stir in wine and cranberry 
juice. Serve chilled. 









kumquat mojitos 

SERVES 8 

48 kumquats, halved and seeded 
2 cups fresh orange juice (4 to 5 oranges) 


1/2 cup sugar 
2 cups fresh mint leaves 


3 cups light rum 
6 cups small ice cubes 


Stir together the kumquats, orange juice, and sugar. 
Let stand 10 minutes. Add the mint. Muddle the 
mixture with a wooden spoon to crush the 
kumquats and mint. Stir in the rum; add the ice. 
Transfer to a large pitcher. 









kirsch-wine cocktails 

MAKES 6 

1/2 cup kirsch (cherry brandy) 

1/2 cup white wine, such as Riesling 
or Sauvignon Blanc 


2 to 4 ounces natural cherry soda 

24 dried cherries (about 2 ounces) 

Combine kirsch and wine in a pitcher, and refrigerate 
until ready to serve. Fill six 10-ounce glasses 
with ice. Divide kirsch-wine mixture evenly among 
glasses. Top off each glass with the soda; stir. Garnish 
each drink with 4 cherries. 












cucumber-ginger fizzes 

MAKES 8 

11/2 cups vodka 

2 English cucumbers (1 peeled and 
coarsely chopped, 1 whole) 


1 lime, cut into 8 wedges 

2 bottles (750 ml each) sparkling water 

1/2 to 1 cup Ginger Simple Syrup 
(recipe page 614) 


1. Put vodka and the chopped cucumber into a nonreactive 
container. Refrigerate 1 hour. Strain; discard 
cucumber. Refrigerate until ready to use, up to 
2 days. 
2. Using a vegetable peeler, shave the remaining 
cucumber lengthwise into wide strips; discard seeds. 
3. Fill 8 glasses with ice. Add 3 cucumber strips and 
3 tablespoons infused vodka to each glass. Squeeze 
a lime wedge into each, and drop into drink. Top 
with sparkling water, and stir in 1 to 2 tablespoons 
of the ginger syrup. Serve immediately. 
612 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 








bing cherry mojitos 

SERVES 12 

11/4 cups sugar 

11/4 cups fresh lime juice (about 9 limes) 

3 pounds Bing cherries 

18 ounces best-quality black cherry 
or plain vodka 


1 bottle (750 ml) sparkling water 

1. Bring sugar and 11/4 cups water to a boil in a small 
saucepan, stirring until sugar has dissolved. Remove 
from heat; let cool completely. (Makes about 
2 cups syrup.) The syrup can be refrigerated in an 
airtight container up to 1 month. 
2. Put lime juice into a medium nonreactive bowl. 
Halve and pit cherries; add to lime juice. Stir in 
syrup. Refrigerate at least 1 hour (up to overnight). 
3. Stir cherry mixture and vodka in a large serving 
bowl. Fill 12 glasses with ice. Spoon 1/2 cup cherry-
vodka mixture into each glass. Top off with 
sparkling water. Serve immediately. 







blackberry-mint julep 

SERVES 4 

Like the original, our julep features bourbon infused 
with mint. But this drink's signature sweetness 
is tempered by the tartness of blackberries, 
which also tint it a gorgeous shade of purple. Another 
twist: Our cocktail is blended with-rather 
than served over-ice, creating a slushy texture. 

1/2 cup packed fresh mint leaves 

1 pint blackberries 

6 tablespoons sugar 

1/2 cup bourbon 

Mint sprigs, for garnish 

1. Roughly chop the mint leaves. 
2. Puree the mint, blackberries, and sugar in a 
blender. Press through a fine sieve into a bowl; discard 
seeds. 
3. Rinse blender, then return puree to blender, and 
add bourbon and 4 cups small ice cubes; blend until 
smooth. Divide mixture among 4 glasses. Garnish 
each with a mint sprig. 







fresh yellow tomato 
bloody mary 

SERVES 4; MAKES ABOUT 3 CUPS 

To make a traditional Bloody Mary cocktail, substitute 
ripe red tomatoes for the yellow ones. 

1 pound ripe yellow tomatoes 
(about 4 medium) 


3/4 cup best-quality vodka (6 ounces) 
5 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 
(about 2 lemons) 


1 teaspoon Worcestershire sauce 

20 dashes hot green pepper sauce, 
such as Tabasco 


1 to 11/2 teaspoons finely grated peeled 
fresh horseradish 


3/4 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 
Celery hearts, for garnish 


Yellow and red cherry tomatoes, 
for garnish 


1. Puree pound of tomatoes in a blender. Strain 
through a fine sieve into a small bowl, pressing to 
remove as much liquid as possible; discard solids. 
2. Stir together tomato puree, vodka, lemon juice, 
Worcestershire sauce, green pepper sauce, horseradish 
to taste, salt, and pepper in a pitcher. If not 
using immediately, mixture can be refrigerated, 
covered, overnight. 
3. To serve, divide among 4 large glasses filled with 
ice. Garnish each glass with celery and cherry tomatoes 
on toothpicks. 










apple pie-spiced cider 

SERVES 6 

11/4 quarts apple cider 

3 tablespoons firmly packed light 
brown sugar 


1 whole cinnamon stick, plus 6 sticks 
for garnish 


1 teaspoon ground allspice 

1/2 teaspoon ground ginger 

Pinch of ground cloves 

Pinch of freshly grated nutmeg 

Pinch of salt 

1/2 cup Calvados or other brandy (optional) 

In a medium saucepan, whisk together the cider, 
sugar, spices, and salt. Bring to a simmer over 
medium-low heat. Remove from heat; pour in the 
brandy, if desired. Strain into a pitcher; discard the 
solids. Serve immediately, garnished with cinnamon 
sticks. 








hot date 

SERVES 4 

4 cups milk 

7 teaspoons unsulfured molasses 

1/4 teaspoon freshly grated nutmeg 

1/2 teaspoon ground cinnamon 

Pinch of ground ginger 

1/4 teaspoon ground allspice 

Pinch of coarse salt 

14 dates, pitted 

1. In a medium saucepan, heat the milk, molasses, 
spices, and salt over medium heat for 5 to 6 minutes. 
Remove from heat. 
2. Chop the dates in a blender as finely as possible. 
Add about 1 cup milk mixture; blend, scraping 
down the sides as needed. 
3. Strain the date mixture through a fine sieve back 
into the pan; whisk over medium heat until well 
combined. Serve immediately. 







hot buttered rum 
with ginger and cinnamon 


SERVES 4 

4 tablespoons Ginger Simple Syrup 
(recipe follows) 


1 cup dark rum 
4 cinnamon sticks 


4 cups boiling water 

4 tablespoons Ginger Butter 
(recipe follows) 


1. Divide the simple syrup among 4 heatproof 
glasses or mugs; add 1/4 cup rum, 1 cinnamon stick, 
and 1 cup boiling water to each. Stir well. 
2. Top each serving with 1 tablespoon ginger butter. 
Serve immediately. 







ginger simple syrup 

MAKES 3/4 CUP 

4 ounces fresh ginger, thinly sliced 

1/2 cup water 
1/2 cup granulated sugar 


In a small saucepan, bring all ingredients to a boil 
over medium heat. Cook 2 minutes. Strain the mixture 
through a sieve, discarding ginger. Store in an 
airtight container in the refrigerator up to 1 week. 








ginger butter 

SERVES 8 

3 pieces crystallized ginger, finely 
chopped (about 2 tablespoons) 


1/2 teaspoon ground cinnamon 

Pinch of ground cloves 
Pinch of freshly grated nutmeg 


1/2 cup (1 stick) unsalted butter, 
room temperature 


In a small bowl, stir ingredients with a fork until 
thoroughly combined. Shape into a log by rolling 
in parchment paper or plastic wrap. Chill until firm, 
about 1 hour, before slicing into eight rounds. 











pickled garlic 

MAKES 1 QUART 

6 heads garlic 

4 cups white-wine vinegar 

4 tablespoons sugar 

1 teaspoon whole black peppercorns 

4 whole cloves 

2 small dried chiles 

1 dried bay leaf 

Rind of 1 lemon 

1. Trim the garlic heads, leaving the stem intact and 
peeling off all but 1 layer of papery skin. Set aside. 
2. Combine the vinegar, sugar, peppercorns, cloves, 
chiles, bay leaf, and lemon rind in a medium 
saucepan. Bring to a boil over high heat; boil 2 minutes 
more. Add the garlic; boil 4 minutes. Remove 
from heat; cover, and let sit overnight in the refrigerator. 
The garlic may be canned, placed in a sterilized 
jar, or stored in the refrigerator in an airtight 
container up to 1 month. 







barbecue rub 

MAKES 2 CUPS 

1 cup chili powder 

3 tablespoons paprika 

3 tablespoons finely chopped fresh thyme 

2 tablespoons coarse salt 

2 tablespoons garlic powder 

1 tablespoon freshly ground black pepper 

2 teaspoons ground cumin 

1 teaspoon cayenne pepper 

Place all the ingredients in a large bowl; whisk to 
combine. Store in an airtight container at room 
temperature. 








mango and tomato salsa 

MAKES 1 QUART 

This piquant salsa should be prepared at least a 
few hours in advance to allow the flavors to fully 
develop. It can be stored in an airtight container 
in the refrigerator for up to 3 days; allow it to 
come to room temperature before serving. 

1/2 red onion, peeled and cut into   dice 

2 ripe mangoes, peeled, pitted, 
and cut into   dice 


2 ripe tomatoes, cut into   dice 

1 jalapeno pepper, seeds and ribs 
removed, minced 


21/2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 
2 tablespoons fresh lime juice 

1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 


1/2 cup loosely packed, fresh cilantro 
leaves, coarsely chopped 


Combine the onion, mangoes, tomatoes, jalapeno, 
lemon and lime juice, salt, and pepper in a small 
bowl; toss to coat. Let stand at least 2 to 3 hours. Stir 
in the cilantro just before serving. 








parsley-walnut pesto 

SERVES 4 

1 bunch fresh flat-leaf parsley, leaves only 
(about 21/2 cups) 


1 garlic clove 
4 anchovy fillets, rinsed 


1/2 cup walnut halves, toasted 
1 teaspoon finely grated lemon zest 


3/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons extra-virgin 
olive oil 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

Process the parsley, garlic, anchovies, walnuts, 
and lemon zest in a food processor until finely 
chopped. With the machine running, add the oil 
in a slow, steady stream until combined. Season 
with salt and pepper. 

616 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 









four-onion and jalapeno confit 

MAKES ABOUT 3 CUPS 

4 tablespoons unsalted butter 

2 medium red onions, cut into   slices 
2 sweet yellow onions, cut into   slices 

4 large shallots, cut into   rings 
10 garlic cloves, halved lengthwise 


1 bunch scallions, cut into   pieces 

5 large jalapeno peppers, seeded and 
cut in  -wide strips 


3/4 cup golden raisins 
1/4 cup packed light-brown sugar 
1/2 cup cider vinegar 
11/2 cups water 

Heat the butter in a saucepan over medium heat. 
Add the onions, shallots, and garlic; cook, stirring 
occasionally, until the vegetables begin to soften, 
about 8 minutes. Add the remaining ingredients. 
Simmer, covered, until very tender, about 1 hour. 
Uncover; simmer until thick and most of the liquid 
has evaporated, about 11/2 hours. Serve warm, or refrigerate 
up to 1 week. 








raita 

MAKES ABOUT 2 CUPS 

1 Kirby cucumber, peeled, halved 
lengthwise, and seeded 


1 cup plain whole-milk yogurt (8 ounces), 
whisked until smooth 


1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 

Chili powder, for sprinkling 

1. Grate enough cucumber on the large holes of a 
box grater to yield 1/2 cup. Transfer to a clean dish 
towel; squeeze out as much liquid as possible. 
2. Stir together the cucumber, yogurt, and salt in a 
small bowl. Refrigerate in an airtight container up 
to 1 day. Before using, stir to combine, then sprinkle 
with some chili powder. 
orange marmalade 

MAKES ABOUT 2 QUARTS 

This marmalade can be made with navel oranges, 
blood oranges, or tangerines. 

2 sweet oranges, preferably organic 

2 cups fresh orange juice (about 2 pounds 
oranges) 


3/4 cup fresh lemon juice (about 3 lemons) 
71/2 cups sugar (3 pounds) 
1. Rinse the oranges under hot water. Quarter the 
oranges lengthwise; slice crosswise as thinly as possible 
with a sharp knife. 
2. Bring the orange slices, orange and lemon juices, 
and 6 cups water to a boil in a large nonreactive 
saucepan over medium-high heat. Reduce heat to 
medium-low. Simmer until the orange peels are 
translucent and tender, about 11/2 hours. 
3. Stir in the sugar. Bring the mixture to a boil over 
medium-high heat, stirring constantly, until the 
sugar is dissolved. Continue cooking, stirring often 
and skimming foam from the surface with a slotted 
spoon, until the mixture is set and registers 220 degrees F 
on a candy thermometer, about 15 minutes. (To test 
if the marmalade has set, place a small amount on 
a well-chilled plate. Press gently with your finger; 
the marmalade should wrinkle. If it doesn't, continue 
to simmer, 5 to 10 minutes more. Test again; 
repeat as needed.) 
4. Let cool, then transfer to an airtight container. 
Marmalade can be refrigerated up to 1 month. (Alternatively, 
transfer the marmalade to sterilized 
canning jars and process according to the jar 
manufacturer's instructions.) 









apricot-raisin chutney 

MAKES 21/2 CUPS 

2 tablespoons olive oil 

1/2 small onion, finely chopped (about 1/2 cup) 

1 pound apricots, peeled, quartered, 
and pitted 


1/2 cup sugar 

1/2 cup good-quality honey 

1/3 cup raisins 

1/4 cup cider vinegar 

1. Heat the oil in a medium skillet over medium heat 
until hot but not smoking. Add the onion; cook, stirring 
frequently, until soft and translucent, about 4 
minutes. 
2. Transfer the onion to a large saucepan. Add the 
apricots, sugar, honey, raisins, and vinegar. Cook 
over medium heat, stirring, until thickened, about 
25 minutes. 
3. Pour the chutney into a large bowl, and let cool 
completely. The chutney can be refrigerated in an 
airtight container up to 1 week. Bring to room temperature 
before serving. 







strawberry preserves 

MAKES 21/2 CUPS 

These preserves can be canned and stored for up 
to 1 year; multiply the recipe, if you like. 

2 pounds strawberries, hulled 

1 tablespoon plus 1/2 teaspoon 
fresh lemon juice 


1 cup sugar 

1. Put the strawberries and lemon juice in a large 
saucepan. Cook, stirring occasionally, over low heat 
until the juices are released, about 40 minutes. Stir 
in the sugar. 
2. Bring to a boil over medium heat. Cook, stirring 
occasionally, until the mixture registers 210 degrees F on 
a candy thermometer, about 15 minutes. Let cool 
completely; skim foam from the surface with a 
spoon. The preserves can be refrigerated in an airtight 
container up to 2 months. 







chile-citrus ketchup 

MAKES 21/2 CUPS 

1 can (28 ounces) diced tomatoes 

1 medium onion, quartered 

3 garlic cloves, crushed with the flat 
side of a large knife 


1/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons packed 
dark brown sugar 


1/4 cup cider vinegar 

2 teaspoons dry mustard 
Pinch of ground nutmeg 


1/4 teaspoon ground allspice 
Pinch of chili powder 


1/2 teaspoon finely grated orange 
zest plus 1 cup fresh orange juice 
(2 oranges total) 


2 tablespoons brewed espresso 

1 bay leaf 

1 fresh habanero chile 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


1. Puree the diced tomatoes and juice, onion, garlic, 
and sugar in a food processor. Transfer the 
tomato mixture to a large, heavy-bottomed stockpot. 
Add the vinegar, 1 cup water, and the dry mustard, 
nutmeg, allspice, chili powder, orange zest, 
orange juice, espresso, bay leaf, and habanero chile. 
2. Bring the mixture to a boil over medium heat. Reduce 
heat; simmer, stirring occasionally, until thickened, 
about 50 minutes. 
3. Remove the chile. Puree half or whole chile (depending 
on desired heat) with 1 cup ketchup in the 
food processor. Return the ketchup to the pot; stir 
until well blended. Season with salt and pepper. Let 
cool completely. The ketchup can be refrigerated 
in an airtight container, up to 2 weeks. 
618 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 









tarragon tartar sauce 

MAKES 11/4 CUPS 

1 cup mayonnaise 

3 tablespoons sweet relish 
1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice 


3 tablespoons drained capers, rinsed 
1 tablespoon chopped fresh tarragon 


1 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/8 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 


Stir together the mayonnaise, relish, lemon juice, 
capers, tarragon, salt, and pepper in a medium bowl. 
The sauce can be refrigerated in an airtight container 
up to 1 week. 








fennel spice mix 

MAKES 2 TABLESPOONS 

Toss this mix with 2 pounds potatoes just before 
grilling. See page 389 for grilling instructions. 

1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon 
ground fennel seeds 


Pinch of cayenne pepper 
1/4 teaspoon dry mustard 


1 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/4 teaspoon ground ginger 


Stir together the spices in a small bowl. 








southwestern spice mix 

MAKES 1 TABLESPOON 

Toss this mix with 2 pounds potatoes before 
grilling. Once they have finished cooking, sprinkle 
the potatoes with fresh lime juice, if desired. 
See page 389 for grilling instructions. 

1 teaspoon ground cumin 

1/2 teaspoon paprika 
1/2 teaspoon chili powder 


1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/4 teaspoon ground coriander 


Stir together the spices in a small bowl. 








chickpea and spinach spread 

MAKES 2 CUPS 

Make a nutritious lunch by spooning this spread 
into whole-wheat pita halves and layering with 
tomato slices. Or, for a cocktail hour snack, dab a 
small amount on cherry tomato halves. 

1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil 

2 garlic cloves, minced 

2 cups canned chickpeas, 
rinsed and drained 


1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon 
fresh lemon juice 


10 ounces spinach, trimmed 
Coarse salt 


1/2 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes 
2 teaspoons tahini 


1. Heat the oil in a large stockpot over medium heat. 
Add the garlic. Cook, stirring, until fragrant, about 
1 minute. Add the chickpeas and 1 tablespoon 
lemon juice. Cook, stirring, 1 minute. Add the 
spinach, 1/4 teaspoon salt, and the red pepper flakes. 
Cover; raise heat to medium-high. Cook, stirring 
once, until the spinach has wilted, about 4 minutes. 
Uncover; raise heat to high. Cook, stirring, until 
most of the liquid has evaporated, about 2 minutes. 
Let cool. 
2. Pulse the spinach mixture, tahini, remaining teaspoon 
lemon juice, and 1/4 teaspoon salt in a food 
processor until slightly chunky. The spread can be 
refrigerated in an airtight container up to 2 days. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING (1/2 CUP): 208 CALORIES, 

6 G FAT, 0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 31 G CARBOHYDRATE, 557 MG 

SODIUM, 9 G PROTEIN, 7 G FIBER 

SALSAS, SAUCES, DIPS, AND MORE 619 









blue cheese dressing 

MAKES 13/4 CUPS 

1 cup low-fat buttermilk 

1/4 cup mayonnaise 

1/4 cup plain low-fat yogurt 

1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice 

1/2 teaspoon coarsely chopped fresh thyme 

4 ounces blue cheese, crumbled 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

Whisk the buttermilk, mayonnaise, yogurt, lemon 
juice, and thyme in a bowl; stir in the cheese. Season 
with salt and pepper. Chill in an airtight container, 
up to 3 days. 








eggless caesar dressing 

MAKES 11/2 CUPS 

4 small garlic cloves 

1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 

12 anchovy fillets 

1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon finely 
grated lemon zest, plus 1 cup fresh 
lemon juice (2 to 3 lemons total) 


2 tablespoons drained capers, rinsed 
11/2 teaspoons dried mustard 

1/2 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 

1 cup extra-virgin olive oil 

1/2 cup finely grated Parmesan cheese 

Mash the garlic and salt using a large mortar and 
pestle. Add the anchovies, zest, capers, mustard, 
and pepper; mash to form a paste. Stir in the lemon 
juice. Add the oil in a slow, steady stream, working 
the pestle until emulsified; work in the cheese. (Or, 
puree all the ingredients except the oil and cheese 
in a blender. Add the oil in a slow, steady stream, 
blending until emulsified. Transfer to a bowl; stir 
in the cheese.) The dressing can be refrigerated in 
an airtight container, up to 3 days. Bring to room 
temperature before serving. 








french dressing 

MAKES 3/4 CUP 

2 teaspoons tomato paste 
11/2 teaspoons sugar 

1 teaspoon finely grated onion 

1 teaspoon dried mustard 

3/4 teaspoon paprika 
Pinch of sweet smoked paprika 

1/4 teaspoon coarse salt 

1/4 teaspoon celery seed 

Freshly ground pepper 
41/2 teaspoons red-wine vinegar 
11/2 teaspoons fresh lemon juice 

1/2 cup canola oil 

Whisk the tomato paste, sugar, onion, mustard, paprikas, 
salt, and celery seed in a medium bowl; season 
with pepper. Whisk in the vinegar and lemon 
juice. Add the oil in a slow, steady stream, whisking 
until emulsified. Alternatively, puree all ingredients 
except the oil in a blender. With the machine running, 
add the oil in a slow, steady stream; blend until 
emulsified. Use the dressing immediately. 








fresh italian dressing 

MAKES 11/3 CUPS 

The trick to achieving a good emulsification- 
suspending the oil in water-based ingredients 
such as vinegar-is to add the oil toward the end 
and whisk it in a little bit at a time. 

2 small garlic cloves, pressed through 
a garlic press 


2 teaspoons sugar 

2 teaspoons dried mustard 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1/2 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes 

1/4 cup plus 2 tablespoons red-wine vinegar 

1/2 cup extra-virgin olive oil 

1/2 cup canola oil 

1/4 cup finely chopped fresh basil 

2 teaspoons finely chopped fresh marjoram 

1 teaspoon finely chopped fresh oregano 

620 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


Whisk the garlic, sugar, mustard, 11/2 teaspoons salt, 
1/2 teaspoon pepper, the red pepper flakes, and vinegar 
in a medium bowl. Whisk together the oils; add 
to the vinegar mixture in a slow, steady stream, 
whisking until emulsified. Whisk in the herbs; season 
with salt and pepper. Refrigerate in an airtight 
container, up to 1 week. 








cranberry sauce 
with dried cherries 

MAKES 3 CUPS 

You can substitute dried cranberries or raisins for 
the dried cherries in this recipe. 

31/2 cups cranberries (1 12-ounce bag) 

3/4 cup dried cherries 
1/2 cup finely chopped shallots 

2 tablespoons red-wine vinegar 

Zest and juice of 1 orange (about 1/2 cup) 

2 teaspoons grated peeled fresh ginger 

3/4 cup packed light-brown sugar 
Combine the cranberries, cherries, shallots, vinegar, 
orange zest and juice, ginger, and brown sugar 
in a medium saucepan, and cook over medium heat 
until the cranberries pop. Reduce heat to low; cook, 
stirring occasionally, until the cranberries release 
their juices, about 15 minutes. If the cranberry sauce 
becomes too thick, add water until the desired consistency 
is reached. Transfer to a bowl to cool. 








savory cranberry jelly 

SERVES 12 

2 packages (12 ounces each) fresh or 
frozen (thawed) cranberries 


2 cups sugar 

2 teaspoons minced garlic 

1 teaspoon grated peeled fresh ginger 

1/2 cup cider vinegar 

Large pinch of ground allspice 

Large pinch of coarse salt 

Freshly ground pepper 
43/4 teaspoons unflavored gelatin 

1. Bring the berries, sugar, and 1 cup water to a simmer 
in a covered medium saucepan over medium-
high heat. Cook until the berries are soft, about 10 
minutes. Pass through a fine sieve into a bowl, 
pressing on the solids to make a puree. 
2. Bring 1/2 cup water, the garlic, ginger, vinegar, allspice, 
salt, and a generous amount of pepper to a 
simmer in a small saucepan over medium-high 
heat. Cook until reduced by half, about 5 minutes. 
3. Pour the vinegar mixture into a small bowl. Sprinkle 
the gelatin on top; stir until dissolved. Stir the 
mixture into the berry puree. 
4. Cover with plastic wrap; refrigerate at least 2 
hours or up to 1 week. 







classic mexican guacamole 

MAKES 11/2 CUPS 

This recipe was inspired by the tableside version 
prepared at Rosa Mexicano in New York City. To 
ripen hard avocados, leave them in a closed 
paper bag at room temperature for a few days. 

11/2 tablespoons finely chopped white onion 

1 tablespoon plus 2 teaspoons 
finely chopped fresh cilantro 


11/4 teaspoons finely chopped seeded 
jalapeno pepper 

1/2 teaspoon coarse salt, plus more 
for seasoning if desired 


1 ripe Hass avocado, pitted, peeled, 
and coarsely chopped 


3 tablespoons finely chopped 
seeded tomato 


With a large mortar (such as a molcajete) and pestle 
(or tejolote), mash the onion, 1 tablespoon 
cilantro, jalapeno, and salt until smooth and juicy. 
Add the avocado, and mash slightly (the avocado 
should remain somewhat chunky). Stir in the 
tomato and remaining 2 teaspoons cilantro. Season 
with salt, if desired. Serve immediately. 










tomatillo guacamole 

MAKES 1 CUP 

For this version, make a basic tomatillo salsa, 
then puree it with avocado. This recipe makes 
extra salsa you can serve on its own along with 
tortilla chips. The salsa's acidity preserves the 
color of guacamole; it can be refrigerated, in an 
airtight container, up to 1 day. 

6 tomatillos (about 13 ounces), 
husked and halved 


1/2 jalapeno pepper with seeds 
(about 1/4 ounce) 


1/4 cup finely chopped white onion 

2 tablespoons finely chopped fresh cilantro 

3/4 teaspoon coarse salt 
1 ripe Hass avocado, pitted, peeled, 
and coarsely chopped 


Puree the tomatillos, jalapeno, onion, cilantro, and 
salt in a food processor or blender until smooth. Reserve 
1/2 cup salsa; the remaining cup salsa can be 
served separately. Puree the avocado and the reserved 
salsa until smooth. 








roasted garlic vinaigrette 

MAKES 3/4 CUP 

Refrigerate the vinaigrette in an airtight container 
up to 3 days. 

10 Roasted Garlic cloves (page 200) 

3 tablespoons sherry vinegar 

1 tablespoon honey 

1 teaspoon Dijon mustard 

3/4 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/2 cup extra-virgin olive oil 
Freshly ground pepper 


Squeeze the garlic cloves from their skins into a 
blender. Add the vinegar, honey, mustard, and salt; 
blend until smooth, about 10 seconds. With the machine 
running, pour in the oil in a slow, steady 
stream; blend until emulsified. Season with pepper. 








mole sauce 

MAKES 3 CUPS 

This classic Mexican sauce is often used in 
enchiladas or served with tamales. 

1 slice white bread or 2 slices baguette 

1 garlic clove, unpeeled 
1/3 cup whole almonds (2 ounces) 


1 ancho chile 
1 tablespoon vegetable oil or lard 


1/2 white onion, finely chopped 
1 pint grape tomatoes 


1/2 small canned chipotle pepper in adobo 
sauce, plus 1 teaspoon adobo sauce 


1/2 large ripe banana, cut into pieces 

2 tablespoons plus 1 teaspoon unsweetened 
cocoa powder 

11/2 teaspoons packed light-brown sugar 
1/4 teaspoon ground cinnamon 

1/4 teaspoon dried oregano 
1/8 teaspoon ground cloves 


11/2 cups homemade or low-sodium 
store-bought chicken stock 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1. In a 9-inch cast-iron skillet, toast the bread over 
medium-high heat, turning once, until golden. Tear 
the bread into large pieces; pulse in a blender until 
fine crumbs form. Transfer to a large bowl. 
2. In the skillet, cook the garlic over medium-high 
heat, turning occasionally, until soft and charred, 
about 5 minutes. When cool enough to handle, 
squeeze the clove from the skin; add to the bowl 
with the bread crumbs. 
3. Toast the almonds in the skillet over medium 
heat, tossing occasionally, until golden, about 3 
minutes. Transfer to the bowl. 
4. Wipe the chile with a damp paper towel. Slit the 
chile lengthwise; remove the stem, ribs, and seeds, 
reserving the seeds. Cook the chile in the skillet 
over medium heat, turning once, until it just begins 
to blister (do not burn it), 10 to 30 seconds. Transfer 
to the bowl. 
622 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


5. Pour the oil into the skillet; add the onion. Cook 
over medium heat, stirring, until soft and translucent, 
about 3 minutes. Transfer to the bowl. Add the 
tomatoes to the skillet; cook, tossing, until slightly 
charred, about 5 minutes. Transfer to the bowl. 
6. Add the chipotle, adobo sauce, reserved chile 
seeds, banana, cocoa, sugar, cinnamon, oregano, 
and cloves to the bowl, and stir well. Working in 
batches, puree the mixture in a blender until 
smooth, adding the stock a little at a time. 
7. Transfer the puree to a medium saucepan. Cook 
over medium-low heat, stirring until slightly thickened, 
about 20 minutes. Pass the mole through a 
sieve into a serving bowl; discard the solids. Season 
with salt and pepper, and serve warm. 







cilantro salsa 
with coconut and lime 


MAKES ABOUT 1/2 CUP 

This salsa can also be spooned over grilled 
shrimp, fish, chicken, or lamb. 

1 teaspoon cumin seeds 

6 scallions, white and light-green 
parts only, chopped 


2 small garlic cloves 

1 or 2 serrano chiles, seeded for 
less heat, if desired 


3 cups loosely packed cilantro leaves 
1/4 cup fresh lime juice (about 3 limes) 


2 tablespoons shredded sweetened coconut 
1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 


1 tablespoon plus 1 teaspoon olive oil 

1. In a small skillet, heat the cumin seeds over 
medium heat until toasted and aromatic, about 3 
minutes. Let cool slightly, then crush lightly. 
2. In a food processor, process the scallions, garlic, 
and chiles until finely chopped, about 10 seconds. 
Add the cilantro, crushed cumin, lime juice, 
2 tablespoons water, coconut, salt, and oil; pulse to 
form a coarse paste, about 10 times. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 98 CALORIES, 7 G FAT, 

0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 9 G CARBOHYDRATE, 270 MG SODIUM, 

2 G PROTEIN, 2 G FIBER 








roasted garlic aioli 

MAKES ABOUT 1 CUP 

You can make this garlic mayonnaise with a mortar 
and pestle or a food processor-we've provided 
directions for each method. Store in an 
airtight container in the refrigerator up to 3 days. 

1 bulb whole Roasted Garlic (page 200), 
cloves removed 


1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 

3 large egg yolks 

1/2 teaspoon Dijon mustard 

3/4 cup olive oil 
1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice 
With a mortar and pestle: In a large mortar, mash 
the garlic cloves and salt with a pestle until combined. 
Add the egg yolks; stir until combined. Stir 
in the mustard. Pour in the oil a few drops at a time, 
stirring until emulsified. Stir in the lemon juice. 
With a food processor: Process the garlic cloves, 
salt, egg yolks, and mustard until combined, about 
5 seconds. With the machine running, pour in 1/4 
cup oil in a slow, steady stream; process until the 
mixture is slightly thickened, about 10 seconds. 
With the machine still running, pour in the remaining 
1/2 cup oil in a slow, steady stream; process 
until the mixture is thick. Stir in the lemon juice. 










corn relish 

MAKES 2 QUARTS 

This colorful relish is delicious with grilled 
chicken or shrimp. It also pairs well with the piquant 
flavors of quesadillas and crab cakes. 

6 ears fresh corn, shucked 

11/2 cups cider vinegar 
3 tablespoons sugar 
1/2 teaspoon turmeric 

3/4 teaspoon mustard powder 
1 tablespoon mustard seed 
1 teaspoon coarse salt 


1 dried bay leaf 
4 cups green cabbage (about 1/2 pound), 
chopped into   pieces 
2 red bell peppers, finely diced 


1 large red onion, finely diced 

1. Fill a medium pot with water, and bring to a boil. 
Add the corn; cook until the kernels are tender, 
about 4 minutes. Using tongs, transfer the corn to 
a platter; let cool. Discard all but 3 cups cooking 
water. Use a sharp knife to shave the kernels from 
the cobs (to yield about 3 cups); set aside. 
2. Add the vinegar, sugar, turmeric, mustard powder, 
mustard seed, salt, and bay leaf to pot. Bring to 
a simmer over medium-high heat. Add the cabbage, 
red peppers, onion, and corn kernels; stir to combine. 
Bring to a boil; immediately remove from heat, 
and let stand 5 minutes. 
3. Strain the mixture, and let the liquid and vegetables 
cool in separate bowls; discard the bay leaf. 
When cool, strain the liquid through a fine sieve 
into the bowl with the vegetables. 
4. Serve the relish chilled or at room temperature, 
using a slotted spoon to leave liquid behind. Store 
in an airtight container in the refrigerator. 








fennel, roasted tomato, 
and basil relish 

MAKES ABOUT 3 CUPS 

Serve with grilled shrimp, fish, or pork. 

Olive oil cooking spray 

1 pound ripe plum tomatoes (about 6) 

4 garlic cloves 

1 fennel bulb (about 1 pound), 
trimmed and cut into   dice 


1/4 cup red-wine vinegar 
1 tablespoon capers, rinsed and drained 


1/4 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes 
or finely chopped fresh red chile 


2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

1 cup loosely packed fresh basil leaves 

1 cup loosely packed fresh flat-leaf 
parsley leaves, coarsely chopped 


1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Coat a baking sheet 
with cooking spray. Slice the tomatoes in half 
lengthwise; arrange them, cut side down, in a single 
layer on the prepared baking sheet. Place the 
garlic cloves on the baking sheet next to the tomatoes. 
Roast in the oven until the tomatoes are soft 
and wrinkled and the garlic is aromatic and tender, 
about 35 minutes. Let cool. 
2. In a medium bowl, stir to combine the fennel with 
the vinegar, capers, red pepper flakes, and oil. Finely 
chop the garlic, and roughly chop the tomatoes; add 
to the bowl. Slice the basil into fine strips; add to 
the bowl along with the parsley. Stir to combine; 
serve chilled or at room temperature. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 78 CALORIES, 5 G FAT, 

0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 9 G CARBOHYDRATE, 56 MG SODIUM, 

2 G PROTEIN, 3 G FIBER 

624 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 









spicy pineapple and mint salsa 

MAKES ABOUT 3 CUPS 

Serve with grilled pork or fish, such as red snapper 
or striped bass. 

1/2 red onion, thinly sliced 

1 or 2 serrano chiles, seeded for less heat, 
if desired, and very thinly sliced 


1 small garlic clove, minced 
1/2 cup fresh orange juice (about 2 oranges) 


1 tablespoon fresh lime juice (about 1 lime) 

1 pineapple, peeled and chopped 
into   pieces 


11/2 teaspoons extra-virgin olive oil 
1 cup loosely packed fresh mint leaves 

In a medium bowl, combine the onion, chiles, garlic, 
orange and lime juices, and pineapple. Add the 
oil; stir to combine. Let stand at room temperature 
at least 15 minutes or up to 1 hour. Just before serving, 
add the mint; toss to combine. 

FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 176 CALORIES, 3 G FAT, 

0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 42 G CARBOHYDRATE, 5 MG SODIUM, 

2 G PROTEIN, 4 G FIBER 








quick pear chutney 

SERVES 4 

1/4 cup walnuts 
1 teaspoon extra-virgin olive oil 


1 shallot, minced 

2 ripe but firm pears


6 tablespoons cider vinegar 
3 tablespoons honey 


4 whole cloves 
1/4 cup golden raisins 


1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Spread the walnuts on 
a small rimmed baking sheet, and toast until fragrant 
and browned, 7 to 9 minutes. Remove from 
heat; let cool, and roughly chop. Set aside. 
2. Heat the oil in a small saucepan over medium 
heat. Add the shallot, and saute until softened, 
about 2 minutes. Add the pears, vinegar, honey, and 
cloves. Bring to a boil, reduce heat, and cook until 
the pears are tender, 4 to 5 minutes. Discard the 
cloves; stir in the raisins and walnuts. Remove from 
heat. Serve warm or at room temperature. 








rosemary balsamic marinade 

MAKES 3/4 CUP, ENOUGH FOR 2 POUNDS MEAT 

This goes remarkably well with steak. 

1/2 cup balsamic vinegar 
2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 


6 garlic cloves, coarsely chopped 

1/2 teaspoon freshly ground pepper, plus 
more for seasoning 


6 rosemary sprigs, coarsely chopped 
Coarse salt 


1. Whisk together the vinegar, oil, garlic, and pepper 
in a nonreactive bowl. Scatter half the rosemary 
in a shallow nonreactive dish; arrange the meat on 
top. Cover with the marinade; rub gently into meat. 
Sprinkle with the remaining rosemary. Cover; refrigerate 
for the length of time specified below, turning 
the meat occasionally. 
2. Before cooking, remove the marinating meat 
from the refrigerator, and let it come to a cool room 
temperature. Wipe off bits of garlic or rosemary; 
discard the marinade. Season with salt and pepper; 
cook as desired. 








spicy hoisin marinade 

MAKES 3/4 CUP, ENOUGH FOR 

21/2 POUNDS MEAT 

This Asian-inspired marinade pairs perfectly 
with pork-turning into a sticky, spicy, sweet 
glaze when cooked-but can also be used with 
chicken or beef. 

1/4 cup soy sauce 
1/4 cup packed dark-brown sugar 


2 tablespoons sherry 
2 tablespoons fresh orange juice 


2 tablespoons hoisin sauce 
2 tablespoons freshly grated ginger 


2 garlic cloves, minced 
2 scallions, white and green parts, 
thinly sliced, plus more for garnish 
1 tablespoon dry mustard 


1 teaspoon crumbled dried chile or 
crushed red pepper flakes 


Zest of 1 orange 

1. Whisk together the ingredients in a nonreactive 
bowl. Arrange the meat in a shallow nonreactive 
dish or resealable plastic bag. Add the marinade; 
rub gently into the meat. Cover; refrigerate for the 
length of time specified on page 625, turning the 
meat occasionally. 
2. Before cooking, remove the meat from the refrigerator 
and let it come to a cool room temperature. 
Cook as desired, basting with marinade during 
the first half of cooking to create a glaze. Garnish 
with scallions. 







cocktail sauce 

MAKES 1 CUP 

3/4 cup prepared ketchup 
21/2 tablespoons prepared horseradish 
2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 

1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/4 teaspoon hot pepper sauce 


In a bowl, whisk the ketchup, horseradish, lemon 
juice, salt, and pepper sauce to combine. Refrigerate 
in an airtight container for up to 3 days. 








tandoori marinade 

MAKES 2 CUPS, ENOUGH 

FOR 2 TO 21/2 POUNDS MEAT OR FISH 

The yogurt in this traditional Indian mixture tenderizes 
what you're marinating. Try grilling the 
meat or fish to add a smoky flavor. 

1 cup plain yogurt 

1 onion, coarsely chopped 

1/4 cup loosely packed fresh cilantro, 
coarsely chopped 


Zest of 1 lime 

4 garlic cloves, coarsely chopped 

2 to 3 tablespoons freshly grated ginger 

2 tablespoons coarsely chopped fresh mint 

1 teaspoon ground cumin 

1 teaspoon garam masala 

1 teaspoon ground turmeric 

1/4 teaspoon ground nutmeg 

1/4 teaspoon ground cinnamon 

1/4 teaspoon cayenne pepper 

3 tablespoons olive oil 

1 teaspoon coarse salt 

1/4 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper 

1. Whisk together the ingredients in a nonreactive 
bowl. Arrange the meat in a shallow nonreactive 
dish or resealable plastic bag. Cover with the marinade; 
rub gently into the meat. Cover; refrigerate 
for the length of time specified on page 625, turning 
meat occasionally. 
2. Before cooking, remove the meat from the refrigerator 
and let it come to a cool room temperature. 
Cook as desired, basting occasionally with 
marinade during the first half of cooking. 
626 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 









thyme, shallot, 
and lemon marinade 


MAKES 2/3 CUP, ENOUGH 

FOR 2 POUNDS MEAT OR FISH 

This classic marinade pairs nicely with almost 
any meat, particularly shellfish and fish fillets. Be 
careful not to marinate shellfish for longer than 
20 minutes; the acid in the lemon juice will cook 
the flesh. 

3 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 

3 tablespoons dry white wine 

2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

1 bunch fresh thyme (12 to 15 sprigs) 

2 shallots, thinly sliced 

1 lemon, sliced into   rounds 

Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1. Whisk together the lemon juice, wine, and oil in 
a shallow nonreactive dish. Arrange the meat or fish 
in a single layer in dish; turn to coat. Evenly scatter 
the thyme, shallots, and lemon slices over fish. 
Cover; refrigerate for the length of time specified 
on page 625, turning the meat occasionally. 
2. Remove the marinating meat or fish from the refrigerator, 
and let it come to a cool room temperature 
before cooking. Season with salt and pepper. 
Cook as desired. 







apricot mustard 

MAKES ABOUT 1 CUP 

4 ounces dried apricots 
41/2 teaspoons yellow mustard seeds 
41/2 teaspoons brown mustard seeds 

2 tablespoons ground mustard 

1/4 cup distilled white vinegar 

1/4 teaspoon coarse salt 

Mix the apricots, mustard seeds, ground mustard, 
and 3/4 cup water in a bowl. Refrigerate, covered, 
overnight. Put the mixture in a food processor. Add 
the vinegar and salt; puree. The mustard can be 
refrigerated, up to 1 week. 








green tomato salsa 

MAKES 4 CUPS 

We like to serve grilled fish over a coulis made 
by pureeing half the salsa until smooth and 
adding olive oil until the mixture is the desired 
consistency. 

1 poblano chile 

2 pounds (about 6 medium) green 
tomatoes, seeded and finely chopped 


1 small or 1/2 large Vidalia or other 
sweet onion, finely chopped 


1 medium cucumber, peeled, seeded, 
and finely chopped 


4 scallions, sliced thinly crosswise 

2 tablespoons fresh lime juice 
(about 2 limes) 


1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil 

1/2 cup finely chopped fresh cilantro 
Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 


1. Roast the chile directly on a gas-stove burner over 
high heat, or under the broiler, turning as each side 
blackens. Transfer to a bowl; cover with plastic. Let 
stand until cool enough to handle. Peel off the skin; 
discard the stem and seeds. Finely chop the chile, 
and place in a medium bowl. 
2. Add the tomatoes, onion, cucumber, scallions, 
lime juice, oil, and cilantro. Stir. Season with salt 
and pepper; let stand 30 minutes. Store in the refrigerator 
up to 3 days. 






cranberry marmalade 

MAKES ABOUT 41/2 CUPS 

5 juice oranges (6 ounces each), chopped 
into   dice (including peel) 


5 cups fresh cranberries 
21/2 cups sugar 

Bring oranges, cranberries, sugar, and 1 cup water 
to a boil in a medium saucepan. Reduce heat, and 
simmer until mixture has the consistency of loose 
jam, about 35 minutes. Transfer to a bowl. Stir 
before serving. The marmalade can be refrigerated, 
covered, up to 1 week. 

SALSAS, SAUCES, DIPS, AND MORE 627 








lemon aioli 

MAKES 1 CUP 

1 large egg 

1 teaspoon coarse salt 

1/2 cup canola oil 

1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil 

3 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 

Zest of 1 lemon 

Place the egg and salt in the bowl of a food processor; 
blend until foamy. With the machine running, 
add the canola oil and then the olive oil a few drops 
at a time and then in a slow, steady stream. Add the 
lemon juice and zest; blend briefly. Adjust the seasoning. 
Refrigerate in an airtight container for up 
to 2 days. 








basic vinaigrette 

MAKES 2/3 CUP 

This is a good vinaigrette for a simple green 
salad. Use extra-virgin olive oil if you prefer a 
fruitier flavor. 

2 tablespoons good-quality white- 
wine vinegar 


1 teaspoon Dijon mustard 

1 small shallot, finely chopped 

1 teaspoon coarse salt, plus more 
for seasoning 


1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper, plus 
more for seasoning 


6 tablespoons good-quality olive oil 

1. Combine the vinegar, mustard, shallot, salt, and 
pepper in a bowl. Allow the ingredients to macerate 
for 10 minutes. 
2. While whisking, slowly add the olive oil until the 
mixture is emulsified. Adjust the seasoning with 
salt and pepper, if desired. 







fresh mint jelly 

MAKES 1 8-INCH-SQUARE PAN 

You can substitute 3 tablespoons powdered 
pectin for the liquid pectin. Dissolve it in 1/2 cup 
warm water before adding it to the mint mixture. 

2 cups firmly packed mint leaves 
and stems (3 to 4 bunches) 


2 cups water 

3 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 
31/2 cups sugar 

3 ounces liquid pectin 
2 drops green food coloring 


1. Place the mint in the jar of a blender with 2 cups 
water; blend for 10 seconds, until the mint is finely 
chopped. Place in a medium saucepot; bring to a 
boil. Remove from the heat; steep for 45 minutes to 
infuse the flavor. Strain into a bowl through a fine-
mesh strainer lined with damp cheesecloth, squeezing 
out all liquid to yield 13/4 to 2 cups liquid. 
2. Return the mint water to a clean saucepan; add 
the lemon juice and sugar. Bring to a boil; cook for 
1 minute; skim the surface. Add the pectin; return 
to a full boil; cook 1 minute more. Remove from 
heat; stir in the food coloring. Skim the surface. Pour 
into an 8-inch-square baking pan; let cool on a rack. 
Cover with plastic wrap; chill overnight. 
3. Run a paring knife around edges to loosen the 
jelly from the pan. Slice into   cubes; use an 
offset spatula to lift them from pan, and transfer to 
a serving dish. 







buttermilk-herb vinaigrette 

MAKES ABOUT 1/2 CUP 

4 tablespoons buttermilk 

2 tablespoons white-wine vinegar 
1/2 garlic clove, minced 


1/2 teaspoon coarse salt, plus more for 
seasoning 


1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper, plus 
more for seasoning 


2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil 

1/4 cup chopped fresh herbs, such as chives, 
parsley, thyme, tarragon, and dill 


628 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


Combine the buttermilk, vinegar, garlic, salt, and 
pepper in a bowl. Allow the ingredients to macerate 
for 10 minutes. Slowly whisk in the oil until the 
mixture is emulsified. Stir in the herbs. Adjust the 
seasoning, with salt and pepper. 








cucumber relish 

MAKES ABOUT 1 QUART 

The relish can be made up to 1 day ahead and refrigerated; 
add the salt just before serving. 

11/2 teaspoons cumin seeds 

2 cucumbers 

2 celery stalks, finely chopped 

1 bunch scallions, white and light 
green parts, thinly sliced 


2 poblano chiles or green bell peppers, 
seeds and ribs removed, finely chopped 


1/4 cup finely chopped fresh cilantro 

3 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 

Coarse salt 

1. Heat a small skillet over medium heat. Add the 
cumin seeds; toast, stirring, until they are lightly 
browned. Transfer to a small bowl; let cool. 
2. Peel and seed the cucumbers, and cut into   
dice. Place in a large bowl, and add the celery, scallions, 
poblano chiles, cilantro, lemon juice, and 
toasted cumin seeds. Season with salt, and serve. 






eggplant caviar 

MAKES 31/2 CUPS 

This dish calls for purple globe eggplants. Instead 
of cooking them over an open flame, you 
can use the oven: Place the eggplants on a shallow 
baking pan, and place under the broiler. Broil, 
turning the eggplants every 5 minutes, until the 
skin is blackened all over and the flesh is falling-
apart tender, 20 to 30 minutes. 

2 purple globe eggplants (11/2 pounds each) 

1/4 cup minced onion (about 4 ounces) 

2 plum tomatoes, seeded, finely chopped 

1/4 cup roughly chopped fresh flat- 
leaf parsley 


1/2 cup extra-virgin olive oil 
11/2 teaspoons fresh lemon juice 

Salt and freshly ground pepper 

Pita or rye bread, for serving 

1. Roast the eggplants; peel away the blackened skin. 
2. Place the eggplants in a food processor; pulse 
until pureed. Transfer to a large bowl; stir in the 
remaining ingredients. Serve warm or at room temperature 
with pita or rye bread. 






pickled zucchini ribbons 

MAKES 2 QUARTS 

Be sure to let the brine cool completely before 
pouring it over the thinly sliced vegetables. If 
submerged in hot liquid, the zucchini and onions 
will quickly turn soggy and won't retain their 
shape or texture during pickling. 

2 pounds medium zucchini 

2 medium onions 

2 tablespoons coarse salt 

1 quart cider vinegar 

2 cups sugar 

1 tablespoon dry mustard 

1 tablespoon yellow mustard seed 
11/2 teaspoons turmeric 

1 teaspoon ground cumin 

1. Using a mandoline or sharp knife, cut the zucchini 
lengthwise into  -thick slices. Halve the 
onions lengthwise, and cut into  -thick slices. 
Transfer the vegetables to a colander set in a bowl. 
Toss well with the salt. Refrigerate 1 hour. 
2. Meanwhile, bring the vinegar, sugar, and spices 
to a boil in a medium saucepan, stirring. Reduce 
heat; simmer 5 minutes. Let cool completely, about 
30 minutes. 
3. Rinse the zucchini and onions well, and drain. 
Pat dry between paper towels. 
4. Transfer the zucchini and onions to a large bowl; 
pour in the brine. Transfer to airtight containers; 
refrigerate at least 1 week (and up to 3 weeks). 
SALSAS, SAUCES, DIPS, AND MORE 629 








spicy pickled 
green and wax beans 


MAKES 2 QUARTS 

Coarse salt 

1 pound green beans, trimmed 
1 pound yellow wax beans, trimmed 


3 cups distilled white vinegar 
3 garlic cloves 


1/4 teaspoon cayenne pepper 

1. Bring a large saucepan of water to a boil; add salt. 
Prepare an ice-water bath; set aside. Cook the beans 
until just tender, about 3 minutes. Immediately 
transfer with tongs to the ice-water bath. Drain well, 
and transfer to a large bowl. 
2. Bring 3 cups water, the vinegar, 3 tablespoons 
salt, the garlic, and the cayenne to a boil in a 
medium saucepan. Reduce heat; simmer 4 minutes. 
Pour the brine over the beans. Let cool completely, 
about 30 minutes. Transfer to airtight containers; 
refrigerate at least 1 week (and up to 3 weeks more). 






sweet pickled red onions 

MAKES 1 QUART 

2 pounds red onions 

1 tablespoon coarse salt 
3 cups cider vinegar 


11/2 cups sugar 
15 whole black peppercorns 

4 whole cloves 
2 cinnamon sticks 


6 whole allspice 
2 dried hot red chiles 


2 small bay leaves 

1. Cut the onions into  -thick slices; transfer 
to a colander set in a bowl. Toss well with the salt. 
Refrigerate 1 hour. Rinse well; drain. Pat dry between 
paper towels. 
2. Bring the vinegar, sugar, and spices to a boil in 
a medium saucepan, stirring. Let cool completely, 
about 30 minutes. 
3. Add the onions; bring to a boil. Transfer the onions 
to a large bowl using a slotted spoon. Let the brine 
cool completely, about 30 minutes; pour over the 
onions. Transfer to airtight containers; refrigerate at 
least 1 week (pickles will keep 3 weeks more). 






marinated baby artichokes 

MAKES 2 CUPS 

These make a wonderful addition to any summer 
salad or antipasto. They can also be served as a 
side dish with roasted or grilled lamb. 

2 lemons 
11/2 pounds baby artichokes 

1 head garlic, cut in half 

2 tablespoons whole black peppercorns 

2 tablespoons coarse salt 

1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil 

1 small bunch fresh thyme 

Pinch of freshly ground black pepper 

1. Fill a large bowl with cold water; juice the lemons 
into the water. Set aside. Trim the spiky tops, tough 
stems, and outer leaves from the artichokes; halve 
lengthwise. Scrape any pink choke out from the center, 
leaving the artichoke half intact. Transfer the 
cut artichokes to the acidulated water immediately. 
2. Drain the artichokes. Fill a large saucepan with 
water. Add the artichokes, garlic halves, peppercorns, 
11/2 tablespoons salt, 2 tablespoons olive oil, 
and thyme to the saucepan. Set over high heat; 
bring to a boil. Reduce heat; simmer, using a few 
layers of cheesecloth or a plate to keep the artichokes 
submerged, until they are tender when 
pierced with a sharp knife, about 5 minutes. 
3. Remove from heat, and drain. Reserve the artichoke 
halves, some of the garlic, and a few sprigs 
of thyme. Place in a bowl, and drizzle with the remaining 
2 tablespoons olive oil. Season with the remaining 
11/2 teaspoons salt and pinch of pepper. 
Keep refrigerated, up to 5 days, until needed. 
630 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 








ginger pickled beets 

MAKES 1 QUART 

Serve these beets as part of a picnic platter or relish 
tray, or use them in sandwiches or salads. 
Golden beets work as nicely as red ones. Leaving 
beet tails and an inch or so of the stems intact 
helps minimize the loss of color (as well as flavor 
and nutrients) during cooking. Trim and peel the 
beets after they've been boiled; the skins will 
come off easily. 

5 or 6 medium red beets (about 11/2 pounds 
without greens), tails and about 1 inch 
of stems left intact 


1/2 cup thinly sliced, peeled fresh ginger 
(about 11/2 ounces) 


11/2 cups rice wine vinegar 

1/4 cup plus 1 tablespoon sugar 

1 teaspoon coarse salt 

1. Prepare an ice-water bath; set aside. Cover the 
beets with cold water by 2 inches in a large 
saucepan. Bring to a boil; reduce heat. Simmer the 
beets until tender when pierced with the tip of a 
knife, about 30 minutes. Transfer the beets with a 
slotted spoon to the ice-water bath. Discard the 
cooking liquid. Trim the beets, and rub off the skins 
with paper towels, or peel the beets with a paring 
knife. Cut the beets into very thin rounds; transfer 
to a large bowl. 
2. Bring the ginger, vinegar, sugar, and salt to a boil 
in a medium saucepan, stirring until the sugar is 
dissolved. Pour the liquid over the beets; stir. Let 
stand until completely cool, at least 1 hour. Transfer 
to an airtight container, and refrigerate up to 
1 month. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING (1/2 CUP): 91 CALORIES, 
0 G FAT, 0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 33 G CARBOHYDRATE, 309 MG 
SODIUM, 1 G PROTEIN, 3 G FIBER 








tarragon pickled carrots 

MAKES 2 QUARTS 

Coarse salt 

2 pounds carrots, peeled 

2 cups white-wine vinegar 

1 bunch fresh tarragon 

1 tablespoon coriander seeds 

10 whole black peppercorns 

1. Bring a large saucepan of water to a boil; add salt. 
Prepare an ice-water bath; set aside. Quarter the 
carrots lengthwise; cook until just tender, about 3 
minutes. Immediately transfer with tongs to the ice-
water bath. Drain well; transfer to a large bowl. 
2. Bring 2 cups water, the vinegar, tarragon, coriander 
seeds, peppercorns, and 2 tablespoons salt 
to a boil in a medium saucepan. Reduce heat; simmer 
4 minutes. Pour the brine over the carrots; let 
cool completely, about 30 minutes. Transfer to airtight 
containers; refrigerate at least 1 week (and up 
to keep 3 weeks). 






carrot, miso, and 
ginger salad dressing 

SERVES 4 

To achieve a uniform consistency, grate the carrot 
on the small holes of a box grater before 
pureeing in the food processor. We like to serve 
the colorful dressing in its own dish and let each 
person spoon some over a salad of butter lettuce, 
sunflower sprouts, sliced radishes, and edamame. 

11/2 tablespoons minced fresh ginger 
(1  piece) 

1 large carrot, finely grated 

2 tablespoons plus 1 teaspoon 
rice wine vinegar 


2 teaspoons white miso 

3 tablespoons canola or vegetable oil 

1 tablespoon water, if needed 

1. In the bowl of a food processor, pulse the ginger 
and carrot to a coarse paste. Add the vinegar and 
miso, and pulse to combine. 
2. With the machine running, slowly add the oil in 
a thin, steady stream through the feed tube until 
the mixture is emulsified. Add water if the dressing 
is too thick. Use immediately, or store in an airtight 
container in the refrigerator up to 1 week. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 118 CALORIES, 10 G FAT, 

0 MG CHOLESTEROL, 4 G CARBOHYDRATE, 147 MG SODIUM, 

1 G PROTEIN, 1 G FIBER 







curried yogurt dip 

MAKES 2 CUPS 

2 cups plain whole-milk yogurt (16 ounces), 
preferably Greek 


6 tablespoons vegetable oil 
1 teaspoon brown mustard seeds 


20 fresh curry leaves, plus more for garnish 
2 teaspoons grated peeled fresh ginger 

10 fresh, small hot chiles, such as serrano 
or Thai (2 seeded and chopped; 8 whole) 


1 teaspoon turmeric 
2 teaspoons coarse salt 


1 teaspoon sugar 

Store-bought papads and dried 
persimmons, for serving (optional) 


1. Put the yogurt in a medium bowl. Heat 1/4 cup oil 
in a small skillet over medium-high heat until hot. 
Add 1/2 teaspoon mustard seeds. Cook, shaking, 
until the seeds pop, about 45 seconds. Add the curry 
leaves; cook until starting to wilt, about 1 minute. 
Add the ginger and chopped chiles. Cook, stirring, 
30 seconds. Stir in the turmeric. Pour the mixture 
over the yogurt. Stir in the salt and sugar. Transfer 
to a serving dish. 
2. Heat 2 tablespoons oil in a small skillet over 
medium-high heat until hot. Add 1/2 teaspoon mustard 
seeds and the whole chiles. Cook, shaking, until 
the seeds pop, about 45 seconds. Garnish the dip 
with the chile mixture and curry leaves. Serve with 
papads and persimmons, if desired. 
632 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 








hot crab dip 

MAKES 4 CUPS 

8 tablespoons (1 stick) unsalted butter 

1 medium onion, finely chopped 

2 garlic cloves, minced 

6 tablespoons all-purpose flour 

11/2 cups milk 
1/4 teaspoon cayenne pepper 

2 teaspoons dry mustard 

4 ounces sharp white Cheddar 
cheese, shredded (1 cup) 


2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice, 
plus freshly grated zest of 1 lemon 


2 teaspoons Worcestershire sauce 
10 ounces lump crabmeat, picked over 


2 tablespoons coarsely chopped 
fresh flat-leaf parsley 


Coarse salt and freshly ground pepper 

1 loaf rustic bread (about 1 pound), 
trimmed of crust and torn into   
pieces (4 to 5 cups) 


Baguette slices, toasted, for serving 

(optional) 

1. Preheat the oven to 400 degrees F. Melt 6 tablespoons 
butter in a medium saucepan over medium heat. 
Add the onion and garlic; cook, stirring occasionally, 
until soft, about 4 minutes. Whisk in the flour; 
cook, whisking constantly, 4 minutes. Continue to 
whisk; pour in the milk in a slow, steady stream. 
Simmer over medium heat, whisking, until thickened, 
about 4 minutes. Stir in the cayenne and mustard. 
Gradually whisk in the cheese until melted. 
2. Remove from heat. Stir in the lemon juice, zest, 
and Worcestershire. Stir in the crabmeat and parsley. 
Season with salt and pepper. Transfer to a 
1-quart ovenproof dish. 
3. Melt the remaining 2 tablespoons butter; stir into 
the bread pieces. Season with salt and pepper. 
Arrange the bread mixture over the crab dip. Bake 
until heated through and golden brown, 25 to 30 
minutes. Let stand at room temperature 10 minutes. 
Serve with baguette slices. 






fava bean and sausage dip 

MAKES ABOUT 3 CUPS 

Look for merguez at specialty stores, or use another 
spicy sausage in its place. 

1 cup large, dried, split fava beans 
(8 ounces) 


6 garlic cloves (3 whole; 3 sliced lengthwise) 

Coarse salt 

12 ounces merguez (spicy Moroccan 
lamb sausages), casings removed 


1/3 cup extra-virgin olive oil, plus 
more for drizzling 


1/4 cup tahini 

1/4 cup fresh lemon juice, plus 1 teaspoon 
freshly grated lemon zest (2 lemons) 


Freshly ground pepper 

3 tablespoons fresh flat-leaf parsley 
leaves, for garnish 


Flatbread crisps, for serving 

1. Bring 5 cups water and the fava beans, whole garlic 
cloves, and 1/2 teaspoon salt to a boil in a medium 
saucepan. Reduce heat, and simmer until the beans 
are tender, about 30 minutes. Drain well; let stand 
until cool, about 15 minutes. 
2. Crumble the sausage into a large skillet. Cook 
over medium heat, stirring and draining off fat occasionally, 
6 minutes. Add the sliced garlic. Cook, 
stirring occasionally, until the sausage is cooked 
through and the garlic is crisp, about 4 minutes more. 
3. Put the bean mixture, oil, tahini, lemon juice and 
zest, 3/4 teaspoon salt, a pinch of pepper, and 1/4 cup 
water in a food processor. Process, adding up to 1/4 
cup more water, until smooth and creamy. Season 
with salt and pepper. 
4. Smooth the dip in an even layer on a platter. 
Using a slotted spoon, arrange the sausage on top. 
Top with parsley; drizzle with oil. Serve with flat-
bread crisps. 
SALSAS, SAUCES, DIPS, AND MORE 633 








swiss chard tzatziki 

MAKES ABOUT 11/4 CUPS; SERVES 4 

1 cup green or red Swiss chard, stemmed 
and finely chopped 


1 garlic clove 
1/4 teaspoon coarse salt 


1 cup low-fat Greek yogurt 
1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil 


1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice 
1/8 teaspoon cayenne pepper 


2 whole-wheat pitas, cut into wedges 
and toasted 


1. Prepare an ice-water bath; set aside. Bring a large 
saucepan of water to a boil. Add chard; cook until 
just tender, 3 to 5 minutes. Drain. Immediately 
plunge into ice bath to stop the cooking. Drain. 
2. Using a mortar and pestle, grind garlic and salt 
into a paste. Stir chard, yogurt, garlic paste, oil, 
lemon juice, and cayenne pepper in a medium bowl. 
Serve with pita wedges. The tzatziki can be refrigerated 
in an airtight container up to 1 week. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING: 137 CALORIES, 5 G FAT, 

3 MG CHOLESTEROL, 17 G CARBOHYDRATE, 311 MG SODIUM, 

7 G PROTEIN, 3 G FIBER 







basil chimichurri 

MAKES ABOUT 11/2 CUPS 

In Argentina, garlicky chimichurri, a condiment 
as prevalent there as ketchup is in the United 
States, is spooned over all manner of grilled 
meats, especially steak. Make chimichurri at least 
1 hour ahead to allow the flavors to meld. 

1/4 cup finely chopped fresh basil leaves 

1/4 cup finely chopped fresh flat-leaf parsley 
1 teaspoon finely chopped fresh oregano 


1/2 cup extra-virgin olive oil 
1/4 cup red-wine vinegar 


2 garlic cloves, minced 
2 dried red chiles 


1/4 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/8 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 


Stir together all ingredients in a bowl; cover and refrigerate 
at least 1 hour, and up to 3 days. Serve cold 
or at room temperature. 








roasted red pepper 
and olive salsa 

MAKES ABOUT 2 CUPS 

Tangy olives balance sweet onions and peppers 
in this salsa. Its tartness is good on different sorts 
of white fish, such as tilapia. 

1/2 cup red or white pearl onions, 
blanched and peeled 


1 tablespoon unsalted butter 

1 jarred roasted red pepper, finely chopped 
1/2 cup pitted kalamata olives, thinly sliced 


1/2 cup pitted green Cerignola olives, 
thinly sliced lengthwise 


1 garlic clove, minced 

2 tablespoons finely chopped fresh flat- 
leaf parsley 


3 dried red chiles, crumbled 

1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil 
1/4 cup sherry vinegar 


1/4 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/4 teaspoon freshly ground pepper 


634 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


Put onions, butter, and 2 tablespoons water in a 
saucepan over medium-low heat. Cover; cook until 
onions cook through, about 6 minutes. Cool. Quarter 
onions. Combine with remaining ingredients in 
a bowl. Refrigerate in an airtight container up to 3 
days. Serve cold or at room temperature. 







roasted tomato 
and chipotle salsa 

MAKES ABOUT 31/2 CUPS 

The silky texture of this pureed sauce belies the 
kick of its chipotle and cascabel peppers, which 
are similar in heat to cayenne. Serve it with chips 
or crudites. 

3 dried chipotle peppers 

2 dried cascabel peppers 

2 cups boiling-hot water 

4 medium tomatoes, halved 

1/2 small white onion, coarsely chopped 

1/4 cup loosely packed fresh cilantro 

1 cup soybean oil 

1 teaspoon coarse salt 

1. Preheat the broiler. Put peppers into the hot 
water; cover, and let stand until soft, about 15 minutes. 
Discard stems. 
2. Put tomatoes onto a baking sheet. Broil tomatoes, 
turning once, until blackened, about 4 minutes 
per side. 
3. Puree peppers, tomatoes, onion, and cilantro in 
a food processor until smooth. With the machine 
running, pour in the oil in a slow, steady stream. 
Season with salt. The salsa can be refrigerated in 
an airtight container up to 5 days. Serve warm or at 
room temperature. 






summer bagna cauda 

SERVES 6 

Set out a dish of peppery extra-virgin olive oil 
with a dash of aged balsamic vinegar, Vincotto 
(sweet Italian vinegar), or verjus for dipping. 

Whole milk, for soaking 

2 ounces anchovy fillets 
1/2 cup extra-virgin olive oil 


6 young garlic cloves (or regular garlic), 
finely chopped 


1/4 cup (1/2 stick) unsalted butter, cut into 
small pieces 


1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice 

Sea salt flakes and freshly ground pepper 

4 pounds fresh vegetables, such as celery, 
Belgian endive, young wild fennel (halved 
lengthwise), Persian cucumbers (halved 
or quartered lengthwise), purple scallions, 
and Romano beans 

Calimyrna figs, for serving 

1. Put milk into a shallow dish. Add anchovy fillets; 
soak 10 minutes. Drain on paper towels; pat dry. 
Coarsely chop. 
2. Put 1/4 cup oil and the garlic into a small saucepan 
over low heat. Cook until garlic softens but does 
not brown, about 5 minutes. Add anchovies. Cook, 
whisking constantly, 1 minute. Add butter. Cook, 
whisking, until butter has melted. 
3. Remove pan from heat. Whisk in the remaining 
1/4 cup oil in a slow, steady stream until mixture 
thickens and comes together. If the mixture separates 
at any point, add 2 ice cubes, and whisk until 
mixture comes together; remove partially melted 
ice cubes. 
4. Whisk in lemon juice, and season with salt and 
pepper. Serve warm or at room temperature with 
the vegetables and the figs. 
SALSAS, SAUCES, DIPS, AND MORE 635 








zucchini, avocado, 
and pomegranate salsa 


SERVES 6; MAKES ABOUT 2 CUPS 

2 zucchini (about 1 pound), trimmed and 
cut into   dice (about 31/2 cups) 


1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil 
1 teaspoon finely chopped fresh oregano 


3/4 teaspoon coarse salt 
Freshly ground pepper 
1/4 cup finely chopped red onion 

1 avocado, halved, pitted, peeled, and 
cut into   dice (about 1 cup) 


1/2 cup pomegranate seeds 
1 tablespoon crumbled feta cheese 


1 tablespoon fresh lime juice 
3 whole-wheat pitas (6 inches each) 


Olive oil cooking spray 

1. Preheat the oven to 425 degrees F. Toss zucchini with oil, 
oregano, 1/4 teaspoon salt, and 1/8 teaspoon pepper 
in a bowl. Spread zucchini in a single layer on a 
rimmed baking sheet. Roast, tossing once, until tender 
and golden brown, about 25 minutes. Transfer 
sheet to a wire rack; let zucchini cool completely. 
(Leave oven on.) 
2. Transfer zucchini to a medium bowl. Add onion, 
avocado, pomegranate seeds, feta, lime juice, 1/4 teaspoon 
salt, and 1/8 teaspoon pepper; gently stir to 
combine. Refrigerate 30 minutes (up to 2 hours). 
3. Cut pitas in half; split each half into 2 half-moons, 
and cut each half-moon into 3 triangles. Arrange 
on a rimmed baking sheet. Lightly coat both sides 
with cooking spray. Sprinkle with remaining 1/4 teaspoon 
salt and 1/8 teaspoon pepper. Bake, flipping 
once, until pale golden brown, about 5 minutes. 
Serve with salsa. The pitas can be stored in an airtight 
container at room temperature up to 3 days. 
FIT TO EAT RECIPE PER SERVING (1/3 CUP SALSA, 6 CHIPS): 

162 CALORIES, 1 G SATURATED FAT, 6 G UNSATURATED FAT, 

1 MG CHOLESTEROL, 21 G CARBOHYDRATE, 287 MG SODIUM, 

4 G PROTEIN, 5 G FIBER 







warm cheese 
and glazed pecan dip 


SERVES 12 

Try this dip with sliced green apple, toasted rustic 
bread, or crackers. 

11/2 cups pecan halves 

3 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted 
3 tablespoons packed light-brown sugar 


11/2 teaspoons coarse salt 
1/4 teaspoon plus a pinch of cayenne pepper 

2 packages (8 ounces each) cream cheese, 
room temperature 


8 ounces extra-sharp white Cheddar 
cheese, grated 


1/4 cup heavy cream 

2 scallions, white and pale-green parts 
only, thinly sliced 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees  F. Put pecans, butter, 
brown sugar, 1 teaspoon salt, and 1/4 teaspoon 
cayenne pepper into a medium bowl; toss to combine. 
Spread in a single layer on a rimmed baking 
sheet. Bake until fragrant and sugar has melted, 
about 5 minutes. Let cool completely. 
2. Process cream cheese, cheddar, and cream in a 
food processor until well combined. Transfer to a 
medium bowl. Stir in scallions, remaining 1/2 teaspoon 
salt, and remaining pinch of cayenne. 
3. Spoon cheese mixture into 2 round baking dishes 
(6 to 7 inches in diameter and about 1 inch deep). 
Arrange glazed pecans on top. Bake until dip is just 
heated through, about 10 minutes. 
636 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 











homemade chicken stock 

MAKES 5 QUARTS 

If you plan to use the stock for a specific recipe, 
begin making it at least 12 hours ahead of time, 
and refrigerate for 8 hours so the fat has a chance 
to collect on top and can be removed. 

2 leeks, white and pale-green parts, 
cut into thirds, well washed 


1 teaspoon whole black peppercorns 
6 sprigs fresh dill or 2 teaspoons dried 


6 sprigs fresh flat-leaf parsley 
2 dried bay leaves 


2 carrots, cut into thirds 
2 celery stalks, cut into thirds 


1 4-pound chicken, cut into 6 pieces 
11/2 pounds chicken wings 

11/2 pounds chicken backs 

3 quarts low-sodium store-bought chicken 
broth, skimmed of fat 

1. Place the leeks, peppercorns, dill, parsley, bay 
leaves, carrots, celery, whole chicken, wings, and 
backs in a large stockpot. Add the chicken stock 
and 6 cups cold water, cover, and bring to a boil. Reduce 
to a very gentle simmer, and cook, uncovered, 
about 45 minutes. The liquid should just bubble up 
to the surface. A skin will form on the surface; skim 
it off with a slotted spoon, and discard, repeating 
as needed. After about 45 minutes, remove the 
whole chicken from the pot, and set it aside until 
it is cool enough to handle. 
2. Remove the meat from the chicken bones, set the 
meat aside, and return the bones to the pot. Transfer 
the chicken meat to the refrigerator for another 
use; if you plan to use it for chicken noodle soup, 
shred the meat before refrigerating it. 
3. Continue to simmer the stock mixture, on the 
lowest heat possible, for 3 hours, skimming foam 
from the top as needed. The chicken bones will 
begin to disintegrate. Add water if at any time the 
surface level drops below the bones. 
4. Prepare an ice-water bath. Strain the stock 
through a fine sieve or a cheesecloth-lined strainer 
into a very large bowl. Discard the solids. Transfer 
the bowl to the ice bath; let the stock cool to room 
temperature. 
5. Transfer the stock to airtight containers. The 
stock may be labeled at this point and refrigerated 
for 3 days or frozen for up to 4 months. If storing, 
leave the fat layer intact; it seals the stock. 







beef stock 

MAKES 6 QUARTS 

You can ask your butcher to cut veal bones into 
small pieces for you. 

8 sprigs fresh flat-leaf parsley 
6 sprigs fresh thyme


4 sprigs fresh rosemary or 2 teaspoons 
dried 


2 dried bay leaves 
1 tablespoon whole black peppercorns 


1 pound beef stew meat, cubed 
5 pounds veal bones, cut into small pieces 

1 large onion, unpeeled and quartered 
2 large carrots, cut into thirds 


2 celery stalks, cut into thirds 
2 cups dry red wine 


638 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


1. Preheat the oven to 450 degrees F. Tie the parsley, thyme, 
rosemary, bay leaves, and peppercorns in a piece 
of cheesecloth to make a bouquet garni. Set aside. 
2. Arrange the beef stew meat, veal bones, onion, 
carrots, and celery in an even layer in a heavy roasting 
pan. Roast, turning every 20 minutes, until the 
vegetables and the bones are deep brown, about 11/2 
hours. Transfer the meat, bones, and vegetables to 
a large stockpot, and set aside. Pour off the fat from 
the roasting pan, and discard. Place the pan over 
high heat on the stove. Add the red wine, and stir, 
using a wooden spoon to loosen any browned bits 
from the bottom of the pan; boil until the wine is 
reduced by half, about 5 minutes. Pour the mixture 
into the stockpot. 
3. Add 6 quarts cold water to the stockpot, or more 
if needed to cover bones. Do not use less water. 
Cover and bring to a boil, then reduce to a very 
gentle simmer so that bubbles occasionally rise to 
the surface. Add the reserved bouquet garni. Skim 
the foam from the surface. Continue to simmer the 
stock over the lowest possible heat for 3 hours. A 
skin will form on the surface of the liquid; skim off 
with a slotted spoon. Repeat as needed. Add water 
if at any time the surface level drops below the bones. 
4. Prepare an ice-water bath. Strain the stock 
through a fine sieve, or a cheesecloth-lined strainer, 
into a large bowl. Discard the solids. Transfer the 
bowl to the ice-water bath, and let the stock cool 
to room temperature. 
5. Transfer the stock to airtight containers. The 
stock may be labeled at this point and refrigerated 
for 3 days or frozen for up to 4 months. If using the 
stock for a recipe, refrigerate for at least 8 hours or 
overnight so the fat collects on the top and can be 
removed. If storing, leave the fat layer intact; it seals 
the stock. 













court bouillon 

MAKES 6 QUARTS 

Court bouillon, the vegetable and herb broth traditionally 
used for poaching fish, imparts subtle 
flavor to the fish as it cooks. The bouillon can be 
made 2 or 3 days ahead. If preparing the fish the 
same day, make the bouillon right in the poacher. 

1 bunch fresh thyme 

1 bunch fresh flat-leaf parsley 

1/2 teaspoon whole black peppercorns 

1/2 teaspoon whole fennel seeds 

1 750-ml bottle dry white wine 

1 leek, white and pale-green parts, sliced 
into   rounds, well washed 


2 medium carrots, sliced into   rounds 

1 lemon, sliced into   rounds 

3 dried bay leaves 

2 tablespoons coarse salt 

Fit a 10-quart fish poacher with a rack in the bottom, 
and place the poacher over 2 burners on top 
of the stove (or use a large stockpot). Fill with 7 
quarts water (about three-quarters full). Tie the 
thyme, parsley, peppercorns, and fennel seeds together 
in a small piece of cheesecloth to make a 
bouquet garni, and place in the poacher; add the 
wine, leek, carrots, lemon, bay leaves, and salt. 
Cover, and bring to a simmer. Uncover; gently simmer 
for 30 minutes. Discard the bouquet garni. Let 
the bouillon cool to room temperature, about 1 hour. 
The bouillon can be refrigerated for up to 1 week 
or frozen for up to 3 months. 

BASICS 639 








vegetable stock 

MAKES 3 QUARTS 

1 tablespoon unsalted butter 

1 tablespoon olive oil 
1 large onion, coarsely chopped 


2 large carrots, coarsely chopped 
2 parsnips, coarsely chopped 


1 celery stalk, coarsely chopped 

1 bunch (about 11/2 pounds) red or green 
Swiss chard, cut into   pieces 


Several sprigs fresh thyme 
Several sprigs fresh flat-leaf parsley 

1 dried bay leaf 

1. In a medium stockpot, melt the butter and oil, 
stirring occasionally, over medium-low heat. Add 
the onion; cook until caramelized, 15 to 25 minutes. 
Add the carrots, parsnips, and celery, and cook until 
tender, about 20 minutes. 
2. Add the Swiss chard to the vegetable mixture. 
Add 31/2 quarts cold water and the thyme, parsley, 
and bay leaf. Cover and bring to a boil, reduce heat, 
and let simmer, uncovered, about 1 hour. 
3. Remove from the heat, and strain the stock 
through a fine sieve or a cheesecloth-lined strainer, 
pressing on the vegetables to extract the juices. Discard 
the vegetables. The stock can be refrigerated 
for 3 to 4 days or frozen for up to 3 months. 
MAKING FULL-FLAVORED STOCK 







fish stock 

MAKES ABOUT 21/2 QUARTS 

Because this fish stock freezes well, you can double 
the recipe; use one batch, and freeze the second 
one for later use. 

4 pounds heads and bones of non-oily fish, 
such as sole, flounder, snapper, or bass 


2 dried bay leaves 

8 sprigs fresh flat-leaf parsley 
1 bunch fresh thyme 


1/2 bunch fresh tarragon 
11/2 teaspoons whole fennel seeds 

8 whole black peppercorns 
3 tablespoons unsalted butter 


1 large leek, white and pale-green 
parts, quartered and sliced 1/4 inch 
thick, well washed 


1 medium onion, cut into   dice 

8 ounces white mushrooms, wiped clean, 
cut into   dice 


2 medium carrots, cut into   dice 
2 celery stalks, cut into   dice 


1/2 fennel bulb, cut into   dice 
1 cup dry white wine 


1. Remove the gills and any blood from the fish 
heads; thoroughly wash the bones, and cut them to 
fit in a 12-quart stockpot. Tie the bay leaves, parsley, 
thyme, tarragon, fennel seeds, and peppercorns 
in a small piece of cheesecloth to make a bouquet 
garni; set aside. 
2. Melt the butter in the stockpot over medium heat; 
add the leek, onion, mushrooms, carrots, celery, and 
fennel, and cook until tender, 8 to 10 minutes. Increase 
the heat to medium high, and add the fish 
heads and bones. Cook, stirring, for 3 to 5 minutes. 
Add the wine, bouquet garni, and 21/2 quarts water, 
just covering the bones. Bring to a boil, reduce heat 
to low, skim, and let stock simmer for 25 minutes. 
Turn off heat; let sit for 10 minutes. 
3. Prepare an ice-water bath. Strain the stock 
through a fine sieve into a large bowl; set the bowl 
in the ice bath to cool. Use within 1 day, or freeze 
up to 3 months. 






dashi 

SERVES 4 

Dashi is a simple stock integral to Japanese 
cooking. The broth is used in both cold and hot 
soups and is delicious warm, all on its own. The 
ingredients may be found at an Asian grocer. 

1   piece of kombu seaweed 


2 tablespoons bonito flakes (fish flakes) 


1 tablespoon plus 2 teaspoons soy sauce 


1 tablespoon mirin 


Juice of 1/4 lime 

Bring 3 cups water to a boil in a small saucepan. 
Wipe off the kombu, add to the boiling water, and 
let boil for 3 minutes. Add the bonito flakes, remove 
from the heat, and let sit for 30 minutes. Strain, then 
add the soy sauce, mirin, and lime juice; serve hot 
or chilled. Dashi should be used within a few hours. 








lobster stock 

MAKES ABOUT 3 QUARTS 

Use this stock as a base for dishes such as 
seafood chowder, bisque, stew, and risotto. 

Shells from 4 cooked lobsters, including 
carapaces 

2 tablespoons olive oil 

2 small onions, quartered 

2 small carrots, peeled and cut 
into   pieces 


2 celery stalks, cut into   pieces 

4 garlic cloves 

1 small fennel bulb, trimmed and 
quartered (optional) 


1 can (141/2 ounces) whole peeled plum 
tomatoes, chopped, including juice 


2 cups dry white wine (optional) 

8 whole black peppercorns 

6 fresh thyme sprigs 

6 fresh flat-leaf parsley sprigs 

1 bay leaf 

1. Remove the head sacs (behind the eyes) in the 
carapaces; discard. Remove any green tomalley or 
red roe; reserve for another use or discard. Wrap the 
shells in a clean kitchen towel. Using a rolling pin, 
meat pounder, or hammer, break the shells (some 
large pieces might remain). 
2. Heat the oil in a Dutch oven or stockpot over 
medium heat until hot but not smoking. Add the 
shells; cook until fragrant (do not let blacken), about 
3 minutes. 
3. Stir in the onions, carrots, celery, garlic, and fennel 
(if desired). Cook, without stirring, until the vegetables 
begin to brown, about 3 minutes. Add the 
tomatoes, wine (if desired), peppercorns, thyme, 
parsley, and bay leaf. 
4. Fill the pot two-thirds with cold water (about 41/2 
quarts). Bring to a boil. Reduce heat; simmer. Skim 
the froth from the surface with a ladle. Cook until 
the broth is aromatic and flavorful, about 1 hour 45 
minutes. 
5. Carefully pour the stock through a fine sieve set 
over a large bowl or container. Discard the solids; 
let stock cool completely. If not using immediately, 
refrigerate in airtight containers up to 3 days, or 
freeze up to 2 months. 
642 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 










hollandaise sauce 

MAKES 1 CUP 

3 large egg yolks 

11/2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 
8 tablespoons (1 stick) unsalted 
butter, melted 

Coarse salt 

1. In the top of a double boiler or in a large heatproof 
bowl set over a saucepan of simmering water, 
whisk the egg yolks with 11/2 tablespoons water, 
whisking vigorously, until the mixture thickens, 
about 4 minutes. Remove from the heat, and stir in 
the lemon juice. 
2. Slowly whisk in the melted butter until thickened. 
Season with salt. Serve the sauce immediately, or 
keep warm over very gently simmering water, 
whisking occasionally. 






bechamel sauce 

MAKES 1 QUART 

4 tablespoons unsalted butter 

1 tablespoon minced shallot 

Coarse salt and freshly ground 
white pepper 


Pinch of ground nutmeg 

Pinch of cayenne pepper 

1/2 cup all-purpose flour 
1 quart whole milk 


1 dried bay leaf 

1 cup grated Gruyere cheese 
(from 3 ounces) 


1. In a large saucepan, heat the butter over medium 
heat. Add the shallot, and cook until translucent, 
without browning, 3 to 5 minutes. Season with salt, 
white pepper, nutmeg, and cayenne. Reduce heat to 
as low as possible. 
2. Add the flour in thirds, whisking constantly. 
When fully incorporated, cook, whisking, without 
browning, until the sauce thickens, bubbles, and 
does not taste floury. 
3. Meanwhile, heat the milk in a small saucepan 
over medium-high heat; bring to a boil, and immediately 
remove from the heat. Add the hot milk to 
the flour mixture in thirds, whisking constantly. The 
texture should be thick, with no lumps. Add the bay 
leaf; continue to cook about 8 minutes over low heat. 
4. Strain through a sieve; add the cheese while the 
bechamel is still hot. Season with salt and pepper. 
Once at room temperature, the sauce may be refrigerated, 
covered with plastic wrap placed directly 
on the surface of the sauce, in an airtight container 
for up to 3 days. Rewarm in the top of a double 
boiler over 1 inch simmering water. 






vietnamese dipping sauce 

MAKES 11/2 CUPS 

Known as nuoc cham, this Vietnamese table 
sauce is used to season dumplings, soups, and 
noodle dishes. 

11/2 teaspoons minced garlic 

1 teaspoon ground chile paste 

1 Thai bird chile or serrano pepper, 
chopped (optional) 


1/4 cup Asian fish sauce (nam pla) 

2 tablespoons fresh lime juice 

1/4 cup sugar 

2 tablespoons grated carrots, for garnish 

Using a mortar and pestle, pound the garlic, chile 
paste, and fresh chile, if desired, into a paste (or 
mince together with a knife). Transfer to a bowl. 
Add the fish sauce, 2/3 cup hot water, the lime juice, 
and sugar. Whisk together until the sugar dissolves. 
Garnish with the carrots, and serve. 

BASICS 643 








bearnaise sauce 

MAKES ABOUT 11/2 CUPS 

1/2 cup white wine 

2 tablespoons white-wine vinegar 

2 tablespoons finely chopped shallots 

2 tablespoons plus 1 teaspoon freshly 
chopped tarragon 


3 whole black peppercorns 

12 tablespoons (11/2 sticks) unsalted butter 

3 large egg yolks 

1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 

1/4 cup boiling water 

1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice 

1. Place the white wine, white-wine vinegar, shallots, 
2 tablespoons tarragon, and the peppercorns 
in a small saucepan set over medium-high heat. 
Bring the mixture to a boil, and cook until it is reduced 
to about 2 tablespoons. 
2. Melt the butter in a small saucepan over medium-
low heat. Keep warm until ready to use. 
3. Place the egg yolks in a copper or stainless-steel 
bowl that fits snugly in the top of a medium 
saucepan. Fill the saucepan with 2 inches of water, 
and bring to a boil. Whisk the yolks, off the heat, 
until they become pale. Add the wine mixture and 
salt, and whisk until well combined. Gradually add 
1/4 cup boiling water, whisking constantly. Place the 
bowl over the medium saucepan of boiling water; 
reduce heat to the lowest setting. Whisking constantly, 
cook until the whisk leaves a trail in the mixture 
and the sauce begins to hold its shape. Remove 
from heat. 
4. Pour the warm, melted butter into a glass measuring 
cup. Add to the yolk mixture, 1 drop at a time, 
whisking constantly. After you have added about 
1 tablespoon melted butter, you can begin to add 
it slightly faster, still whisking constantly. Still, be 
careful: If the butter is added too quickly, the emulsion 
will be too thin or will break (separate). 
5. Once all of the butter has been added, adjust the 
seasoning with the lemon juice, and stir in the remaining 
tarragon. If the bearnaise becomes too 
thick, you may thin it with a little additional lemon 
juice or water. If not serving immediately, place the 
pan of sauce over a pot of simmering water that has 
been removed from the heat, or in a warm spot on 
the stove for up to 1 hour. Alternatively, you may 
store for up to 3 hours in a clean Thermos that has 
been warmed with hot but not boiling water. 







remoulade sauce 

MAKES ABOUT 2 CUPS 

If you are concerned about raw eggs, use store-
bought mayonnaise, and begin at step 3. The 
sauce can be made ahead and refrigerated in an 
airtight container for up to 2 days. 

1 large whole egg 
2 large egg yolks 


1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 
Pinch of sugar 


1/4 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper 

3/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil 
1 to 2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 

3/4 cup canola oil 
1 tablespoon capers, drained and chopped 
2 teaspoons Dijon mustard 


1 tablespoon chopped fresh flat-leaf 
parsley 


1 tablespoon chopped fresh tarragon 

1 tablespoon snipped chives 
1 tablespoon minced shallot 


1. Place the egg, egg yolks, salt, sugar, and pepper 
in the bowl of a food processor. Process until blended. 
2. With the machine running, slowly drizzle the 
olive oil through the feed tube. Add 1 tablespoon 
lemon juice, then slowly drizzle in the canola oil 
through the feed tube. Season with more lemon 
juice, salt, and pepper, if needed. 
3. Stir in the capers, mustard, parsley, tarragon, 
chives, and shallot, and serve immediately. 
644 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 








perfect gravy 

MAKES 3 CUPS 

For the best poultry gravy, do not roast the turkey 
or chicken in a nonstick roasting pan: It keeps 
the flavorful bits of meat and skin from cooking 
onto the pan. 

Giblets from a turkey or chicken: neck, 
heart, gizzard, and liver 

31/2 tablespoons unsalted butter 

2 celery stalks, roughly chopped 
1 carrot, roughly chopped 


1 medium onion, roughly chopped 

1 medium leek, white and green parts, 
roughly chopped, well washed 


6 whole black peppercorns 
1 dried bay leaf 


11/2 cups Madeira wine 
3 tablespoons all-purpose flour 

2 teaspoons minced fresh rosemary 

3/4 teaspoon coarse salt 
1/8 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper 

1. Make the giblet broth while the turkey is roasting. 
Trim any fat or membrane from the giblets. The 
liver should not have the gallbladder, a small green 
sac, attached. If it is, trim it off, removing part of the 
liver if necessary. Do not pierce the sac; it contains 
bitter liquid. Rinse the giblets, and pat dry. 
2. In a medium saucepan, melt 3 tablespoons butter 
over medium-high heat. Add the vegetables. 
Cook, stirring, until slightly brown, 5 to 10 minutes. 
Reduce heat to medium; add the neck. Cook, stirring, 
until slightly brown, about 5 minutes. Add 1 
quart water. Add the heart, gizzard, peppercorns, 
and bay leaf. Cover; bring to boil. Reduce heat to 
medium-low; cook, uncovered, until broth is reduced 
to about 3 cups, 50 to 60 minutes. Set aside. 
3. Meanwhile, chop the liver finely. Melt the remaining 
1/2 tablespoon butter in a small skillet over 
medium-low heat. Add the liver; cook, stirring constantly, 
until the liver is fully cooked and no longer 
releases blood, 4 to 6 minutes. Add to the cooking 
giblet broth. 
4. Transfer the roasted turkey to a large platter. Pour 
the juices from the pan into a gravy strainer. Set 
aside to separate, about 10 minutes. 
5. Strain the reserved broth. Return to the saucepan, 
and warm over low heat. Place the roasting pan over 
medium-high heat. Pour the Madeira into a measuring 
cup, and then into the pan; let bubble, and 
scrape the bottom and sides of the pan with a 
wooden spoon to loosen any browned bits. 
6. Make a slurry: Place the flour in a glass jar with 
a tight-fitting lid. Ladle 1 cup of the broth into the 
jar. Shake until combined. Slowly pour into the 
roasting pan; stir to incorporate. Cook over medium 
heat, stirring until the flour is cooked, 2 to 3 minutes. 
Slowly stir in the remaining broth. 
7. Raise heat to medium-high. Add the pan juices 
from the fat separator; add the dark drippings from 
the bottom into the roasting pan. Discard the fat. 
Stir in the rosemary. Season with salt and pepper. 
Cook 10 to 15 minutes to reduce and thicken. (For 
thicker gravy, add 1 more tablespoon flour; reduce 
the water to 21/2 cups in step 2.) Strain the liquid 
from the pan through a very fine sieve. Season with 
salt and pepper. Keep warm in a heatproof bowl 
over a pan of simmering water until ready to serve. 








homemade mayonnaise 

MAKES 21/2 CUPS 

A food processor helps make homemade mayonnaise 
quickly, but a whisk works just as well. 
Martha prefers to use entire eggs, not just the 
yolks, for a lighter texture. Add the oil very 
slowly, literally drop by drop. This prevents the 
oil from overwhelming the egg yolks and produces 
a smooth, creamy spread. By varying the 
ingredients, you can create endless variations. 
Substitute a flavored vinegar such as tarragon or 
sherry for the lemon juice, or alter the flavor by 
trying different olive oils. Seasonings or chopped 
fresh herbs may be added to the mayonnaise 
after it is made. 

1 cup light olive oil 

1 cup canola oil 

2 large eggs 

1/4 teaspoon dry mustard 

1/4 teaspoon coarse salt 

2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 

1. Combine the oils in a large glass measuring cup. 
Place the eggs, mustard, and salt in the bowl of a 
food processor. Process until the mixture is foamy 
and pale, about 11/2 minutes. 
2. With the machine running, add the oil, drop by 
drop, through the feed tube, until the mixture starts 
to thicken (about 1/2 cup oil); do not stop the machine 
at this point, or the mayonnaise may not come 
together. Add the remaining oil in a slow, steady 
stream. When all the oil has been incorporated, 
slowly add the lemon juice. The fresh mayonnaise 
can be kept, refrigerated in an airtight container, 
for up to 5 days. 







chinese five-spice powder 

MAKES 1/4 CUP 

Though available prepackaged, homemade five-
spice powder is far more pungent and flavorful 
than store-bought. Rub it on fowl, fish, and meat. 

10 whole star anise 

1 tablespoon whole Szechuan peppercorns 

1 cinnamon stick 

2 tablespoons whole fennel seeds 

1/2 teaspoon whole cloves 

1. Place all the ingredients in a small skillet over 
medium heat, and dry-roast, shaking the pan often, 
until they give off an aroma, about 5 minutes. 
2. Combine all the ingredients in a mortar or a spice 
grinder, and grind to a powder. Store in an airtight 
container in a cool, dark place. 
646 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 








curry powder PASTRY 


MAKES 1/4 CUP 

Homemade spice mixtures are more aromatic 
than store-bought. Rub curry powder on poultry, 
lamb, and beef, or use it to flavor dips, marinades, 
and spreads. 

2 teaspoons whole coriander seeds 

1 teaspoon whole cumin seeds 

1/2 teaspoon whole mustard seeds 

1 teaspoon whole fenugreek seeds 

4 small dried red chiles 

1 teaspoon whole black peppercorns 

10 fresh or dried curry leaves (optional) 

1/2 teaspoon ground ginger 

1 teaspoon ground turmeric 

Place all the seeds together in a small skillet over 
medium heat, and dry-roast, shaking the pan often, 
until they give off an aroma, about 5 minutes. Combine 
all the ingredients in a mortar or spice grinder, 
and grind to a powder. Store in an airtight container 
in a cool, dark place. 







basic marinade 

MAKES ABOUT 1/2 CUP 

1/3 cup extra-virgin olive oil 

2 sprigs fresh rosemary, crushed 

3 sprigs fresh thyme 

3 large cloves garlic, peeled and smashed 

Juice of 1 lemon 

Pinch of freshly ground black pepper 

Combine the oil, rosemary, thyme, garlic, lemon 
juice, and pepper; stir to combine. Unused marinade 
can be refrigerated in an airtight container up 
to 1 week. Discard marinade after using. 








martha's perfect pate brisee 

MAKES TWO 8- TO 10-INCH 

SINGLE-CRUST PIES OR 

ONE 8- TO 10-INCH DOUBLE-CRUST PIE 

The pie dough may be made 1 day ahead and refrigerated, 
well wrapped in plastic, or frozen, up 
to 1 month. 

21/2 cups all-purpose flour, plus more 
for dusting 

1 teaspoon salt 

1 teaspoon sugar 
1 cup (2 sticks) chilled unsalted butter, 
cut in pieces 
1/4 to 1/2 cup ice water 


1. Place the flour, salt, and sugar in the bowl of a 
food processor, and process for a few seconds to 
combine. Add the butter pieces to the flour mixture, 
and process until the mixture resembles coarse 
meal, about 10 seconds. Add the ice water in a slow, 
steady stream, through the feed tube with the machine 
running, just until the dough holds together. 
Do not process for more than 30 seconds. 
2. Turn the dough out onto a work surface. Divide 
into 2 equal pieces, and place on 2 separate sheets 
of plastic wrap. Flatten, and form 2 disks. Wrap, and 
refrigerate at least 1 hour before using. 
BASICS 647 


  




  

large quantity pate brisee 

MAKES FOUR   PIES 

This recipe make 11/2 times Martha's Perfect Pate 
Brisee (recipe page 647). 

33/4 cups all-purpose flour 

11/2 teaspoons salt 

11/2 teaspoons sugar 

11/2 cups (3 sticks) chilled unsalted butter, cut 
in pieces 

1/2 to 3/4 cup ice water 

1. Place the flour, salt, and sugar in the bowl of a 
food processor, and process for a few seconds to 
combine. Add the butter pieces to the flour mixture, 
and process until the mixture resembles coarse 
meal, about 10 seconds. Add the ice water in a slow, 
steady stream, through the feed tube with the machine 
running, just until the dough holds together. 
Do not process for more than 30 seconds. 
2. Turn the dough out onto a work surface. Divide 
into 2 equal pieces, and place on 2 separate sheets 
of plastic wrap. Flatten, and form 2 disks. Wrap, and 
refrigerate at least 1 hour before using. 











pate sucree 

MAKES TWO 8- TO 1  TARTS 

This pastry dough may be stored in the freezer 
for up to 1 month. Defrost by refrigerating 
overnight or letting stand at room temperature 
for 1 hour. 

21/2 cups all-purpose flour 

3 tablespoons sugar 
1 cup (2 sticks) chilled unsalted butter, 
cut into pieces 
2 large egg yolks 


1/4 cup ice water 

1. Place the flour and sugar in the bowl of a food 
processor, and process for a few seconds to combine. 
Add the butter pieces to the flour mixture, and 
process until the mixture resembles coarse meal, 
about 10 seconds. In a small bowl, lightly beat the 
egg yolks and ice water. Add the egg water in a slow, 
steady stream through the feed tube, with the machine 
running, just until the dough holds together. 
Do not process for more than 30 seconds. 
2. Turn the dough out onto a work surface. Divide 
into 2 equal pieces, and place on 2 sheets of plastic 
wrap. Flatten, and form 2 disks. Wrap, and 
refrigerate at least 1 hour before using. 
PaTE SUCReE WALNUT VARIATION: Make the recipe 
as directed, substituting 3/4 cup finely ground walnuts 
for 3/4 cup of the flour. 







chocolate pate sucree 

MAKES ENOUGH FOR ONE 9-INCH TART 

11/4 cups all-purpose flour 
2 tablespoons cocoa powder 

1/3 cup sugar 
1/2 teaspoon salt 


6 tablespoons unsalted butter, chilled, cut 
into pieces 


3 large egg yolks 

1/2 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 

1. Place the flour, cocoa, sugar, and salt in the bowl 
of a food processor, and pulse several times to combine. 
Add the butter, and pulse until the mixture resembles 
coarse meal, about 10 seconds. Add the egg 
yolks and vanilla, and process just until mixture begins 
to hold together, no more than 30 seconds. 
2. Turn dough out onto a lightly floured surface, 
and form into a disk. Cover in plastic wrap; refrigerate 
for 30 minutes, or until ready to use. 
PaTE SUCReE CITRUS VARIATION Make the recipe 
as directed, adding 2 teaspoons of freshly grated 
orange zest and 1 teaspoon freshly grated lemon 
zest with the dry ingredients. 


BASICS 651 


  

652 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 








pate a choux 

MAKES ENOUGH FOR 
3 DOZEN CREAM PUFFS 


1 cup water 
1 stick (1/2 cup) unsalted butter 
1 teaspoon sugar 


1/2 teaspoon salt 
1 cup all-purpose flour 
5 large eggs (1 liquid cup) 


1. Combine the water, butter, sugar, and salt in a 
medium saucepan over medium-high heat. Bring 
the mixture to a boil, and immediately remove from 
heat. Stir in the flour. When the flour is combined, 
return to heat. This mixture is called a panade. Dry 
the panade by stirring constantly for 4 minutes. It 
is ready when it pulls away from the sides and a film 
forms on the bottom of the pan. 
2. Transfer the panade to the bowl of an electric 
mixer fitted with the paddle attachment, and mix 
on low speed, about 2 minutes, until slightly cooled. 
Add the eggs, 1 at a time, on medium speed, letting 
each incorporate completely before adding the 
next. Add the last egg a little at a time until the batter 
is smooth and shiny. Test the batter by touching 
it with your finger and lifting to form a string. 
If a string does not form, the batter needs more egg. 
If you have added all the egg and the batter still 
doesn't form a string, add water, 1 teaspoon at a 
time, until it does. 
3. The batter may be used immediately or stored in 
an airtight container in the refrigerator for up to 2 
days. To use chilled, remove from the refrigerator, 
and stir to soften before filling piping bag. 






puff pastry 

MAKES 23/4 POUNDS PUFF PASTRY, OR 

ENOUGH FOR 16 TURNOVERS 

This pastry dough may be made in advance and 
frozen after the fourth turn for up to 2 months. 
The final two turns should be completed immediately 
before using. 

23/4 cups all-purpose flour, plus more 
for dusting 

1 cup plus 2 tablespoons cake flour 
(not self-rising) 


1 teaspoon salt 

1 pound (4 sticks) very cold unsalted butter 
1 tablespoon fresh lemon juice 

1. Combine 21/2 cups all-purpose flour and the cake 
flour and salt in a medium bowl. Cut 1 stick butter 
into small pieces. Add with the lemon juice to the 
flour mixture; cut in the butter with a pastry cutter 
or 2 knives until the mixture resembles coarse meal. 
Gradually mix in up to 1 cup ice water, until the 
dough just comes together. Pat the dough into a 
6-inch square; wrap in plastic. Chill 30 minutes. 
2. Cut the remaining 3 sticks butter into bits. Sprinkle 
with the remaining 1/4 cup flour; mix together 
by rubbing against a cold work surface with the heel 
of your hand. Form into a 5  square; wrap in 
plastic. Chill 15 minutes. 
3. On a lightly floured surface, roll the chilled dough 
into a 6 x 18-inch rectangle with the short side facing 
you; place the chilled butter mixture in the center. 
Fold the top third of the dough over the butter 
mixture, and the bottom third of the dough over the 
top third. Seal the edges by pressing the dough with 
your fingers. 
4. Turn the dough packet over so the overlapped 
section is on the bottom. Roll into a 6 x 18-inch rectangle 
(do not allow the butter to come through the 
dough). Fold in thirds, as before. Rotate 90 degrees 
(one quarter-turn); roll again into a 6 x 18-inch rectangle; 
fold in thirds. Press 2 fingers into the dough 
to indicate the completion of 2 turns. Wrap in plastic; 
chill 30 minutes. 
BASICS 653 


5. Repeat the rolling-out process in step 4, rotating 
the dough 90 degrees before beginning. Mark 
with 4 fingers, signifying the completion of 4 turns; 
chill 30 minutes. The dough may be wrapped and 
frozen at this point. 
6. Remove the dough from the refrigerator (if 
dough has been frozen, thaw overnight in the refrigerator). 
Give the dough its final 2 turns by repeating 
the rolling-out process in step 4, again 
rotating it 90 degrees, before rolling it out. The 
dough should be used immediately after the sixth 
turn is completed. 







pate sablee 

MAKES TWO 8- TO 1  TARTS 

8 ounces (2 sticks) unsalted butter, softened 

3/4 cup confectioners' sugar 
41/2 teaspoons pure vanilla extract 
2 cups all-purpose flour 
1 teaspoon salt 

Put the butter and sugar in the bowl of an electric 
mixer fitted with the paddle attachment. Mix on 
medium speed until pale and fluffy, about 3 minutes; 
mix in the vanilla. Add the flour and the salt, 
and mix on medium-low speed until just combined 
and crumbly, about 15 seconds (do not overmix). 
Pat the dough into a disk, and wrap in plastic. Refrigerate 
at least 1 hour and up to 2 days, or freeze 
up to 1 month. 







quick puff pastry 

MAKES 2 POUNDS 

13/4 cups all-purpose flour, plus more 
for dusting 

2 cups cake flour (not self-rising) 
1 teaspoon salt 


1 pound (4 sticks) chilled unsalted 
butter, cut into pieces 


1 to 11/4 cups ice water 

2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice 

1. Sift together the all-purpose flour, cake flour, and 
salt into a large chilled bowl. Cut in the pieces of 
butter using a pastry knife until the butter is in very 
small lumps, about 1/2 inch in diameter. 
2. Combine the ice water and the lemon juice, and 
stir into the flour mixture, a little at a time, pressing 
the dough together with your hands until it 
comes together. 
3. Turn the dough out onto a well-floured surface, 
and roll it into a  -thick rough rectangle, approximately 
12 x 18 inches. The dough will be very 
crumbly. Fold the bottom of the rectangle toward 
the center, then the top of the rectangle toward the 
center, overlapping the bottom third, like a letter, 
and give the dough a quarter-turn to the right. Roll 
the dough into a large rectangle, 1/2 inch thick, and 
fold into thirds again. This completes the first double 
turn. Using a dry pastry brush, brush any excess 
flour from the dough. 
3. Repeat the rolling, folding, and turning process 
2 more times to execute another double turn, refrigerating 
the dough for a few minutes if the butter 
becomes too warm. Wrap the dough in plastic 
wrap, and put in refrigerator to chill for 1 hour. 
4. Remove the dough from the refrigerator. Repeat 
the rolling, folding, and turning process again to 
execute 1 more double turn. There will be 6 turns 
in all. The dough needs to be rolled out to a  thick 
rectangle each time. With each turn, the 
dough will become smoother and easier to handle. 
Store the dough, wrapped well in plastic, in the refrigerator 
for up to 2 days, or in the freezer for up 
to 3 months (thaw in the refrigerator). 
654 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


DESSERT BASICS 








almond frangipane 

MAKES 2 CUPS 

Frangipane, an almond-flovored paste, is a classic 
filling for tarts, such as the Sugar Plum Tart on 
page 462. 

1 cup whole blanched almonds, toasted 
and cooled 


1/2 cup plus 3 tablespoons sugar 

8 tablespoons (1 stick) unsalted 
butter, softened 


1 large egg plus 1 large egg yolk, 
room temperature 


2 teaspoons all-purpose flour 

1/2 vanilla bean, halved lengthwise and 
seeds scraped 


1/4 teaspoon salt 

1. Preheat the oven to 375 degrees F. Finely grind the nuts 
with 3 tablespoons sugar in a food processor. 
2. Put the butter and remaining 1/2 cup sugar in the 
bowl of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment; 
cream on medium speed until pale and 
fluffy, about 2 minutes. Add the egg and yolk; mix 
2 minutes. Add the nut mixture, flour, vanilla seeds, 
and salt; mix on medium-high until pale and fluffy, 
about 3 minutes. 
3. Refrigerate in an airtight container until ready 
to use, up to 3 days. 






pastry cream 

MAKES ABOUT 4 CUPS 

Be sure to make the pastry cream on the same 
day you plan to use it; otherwise, it has a tendency 
to become thin and runny. 

1/4 cup plus 1 tablespoon cornstarch 

1/4 cup plus 1 tablespoon all-purpose flour 
1 cup sugar 


1/2 teaspoon salt 
3 large eggs 


4 cups milk 
2 tablespoons chilled unsalted butter, 
cut into small pieces 
11/2 teaspoons pure vanilla extract 

1. Prepare an ice-water bath, and set aside. In a 
medium bowl, combine the cornstarch, flour, 1/2 cup 
sugar, and salt; stir to mix. In another medium bowl, 
whisk the eggs until smooth. Add the flour mixture 
to the egg mixture, and whisk to combine. 
2. In a medium saucepan, combine the milk and remaining 
1/2 cup sugar. Bring the mixture to a boil 
over medium-high heat, stirring until the sugar is 
dissolved. Remove from heat; whisking constantly, 
slowly pour into the egg mixture. 
3. Transfer the mixture to a clean saucepan set over 
medium-high heat. Bring to a boil, whisking constantly, 
until thickened, about 3 minutes. 
4. Transfer the mixture to a large heatproof bowl. 
Whisk in the butter and vanilla; set the bowl in the 
ice bath, stirring occasionally, until completely 
chilled, 10 to 12 minutes. Cover with plastic wrap, 
pressing it directly onto the surface of the pastry 
cream to prevent a skin from forming. Place in the 
refrigerator until ready to use. 
BASICS 655 








lemon curd 

MAKES 11/2 CUPS 

In addition to using this curd in other recipes, it 
is delicious on its own or as a spread for scones 
or shortbread. 

6 large egg yolks 

3/4 cup sugar 
1 tablespoon finely grated lemon zest 
1/2 cup fresh lemon juice 

1/2 cup (1 stick) unsalted butter, cut 
into pieces 


1. Combine the yolks, sugar, and lemon zest and 
juice in a medium heavy-bottomed saucepan. Cook 
over medium-low heat, stirring constantly with a 
wooden spoon, until the mixture is thick enough to 
coat the back of the spoon, 8 to 10 minutes. 
2. Pass the mixture through a fine sieve into a 
medium bowl. Add the butter, 1 piece at a time, stirring 
after each addition, until the butter is melted 
and combined. 
3. Cover with plastic wrap, pressing directly onto 
the surface of the lemon curd to prevent a skin from 
forming. Refrigerate until firm and thoroughly 
chilled, at least 1 hour. 













caramel sauce-dry method 

MAKES 11/4 CUPS 

11/2 cups sugar 

1 vanilla bean, split lengthwise 
and scraped 


1. In a large heavy skillet, spread the sugar in an 
even layer over medium-high heat. Add the vanilla 
bean and seed scrapings. Without stirring, let cook 
until the outer edges of the sugar melt and begin 
to turn golden, about 5 minutes. 
2. With a wooden spoon, slowly stir together the 
melted and unmelted sugar until all the sugar is 
melted, clear, and golden. At arm's length, carefully 
pour in 1 cup water while stirring rapidly. Continue 
stirring until the mixture has melted completely. 
Transfer to a bowl to cool, about 1 hour. Discard the 
vanilla pod. The sauce may be made 1 day ahead and 
kept at room temperature in an airtight container. 
656 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 








caramel sauce-wet method 

MAKES 1 CUP 

3/4 cup boiling water 
1 cup sugar 
Dash of pure vanilla extract 
1 teaspoon cognac 


Combine 1/4 cup boiling water and sugar in a 
medium saucepan. Cook over high heat until the 
sugar dissolves. Once dissolved, do not stir; let cook 
until caramel forms, brushing down the sides of the 
pan with a damp pastry brush as needed to keep 
crystals from forming, about 5 minutes. Remove 
from heat, and slowly whisk in the remaining 1/2 cup 
boiling water at arm's length, being careful not to 
splatter the hot caramel. Remove from the heat, and 
stir in the vanilla and cognac. The sauce may be 
used warm or at room temperature. 

THE COLOR OF CARAMEL 

Caramel is sugar that has been taken just to 
the edge of burning. Caramel's color reveals 
the extent to which it is cooked. The palest 
form is just concentrated sugar syrup. The 
next stage is golden, followed by amber and 
then dark. For most culinary purposes, 
amber is the color of choice for its deep 
golden hue and nutty, sweet flavor. 

swiss meringue for pies 

MAKES ENOUGH FOR HIGH TOPPING FOR 
1 PIE OR LOW TOPPING FOR 2 PIES 


This fluffy cooked meringue makes the best pie 
topping. It is easiest to beat the mixture with an 
electric mixer fitted with the whisk attachment. 

7 large egg whites 

3/4 cup sugar 
1/4 teaspoon salt 
Combine the egg whites, sugar, and salt in a heatproof 
bowl. Set over a pan of simmering water; beat 
with a whisk until warm and the sugar is dissolved. 
Remove the bowl from the heat; beat until stiff 
peaks form. Use immediately. 






swiss meringue 

MAKES 4 CUPS 

This meringue works well for piping shapes. 
Using the whisk attachment to beat the egg 
whites in the final stage works best; warming the 
egg whites helps dissolve the sugar, giving the 
meringue greater volume. 

4 large egg whites, room temperature 
1 cup sugar 
Pinch of cream of tartar 
1/2 teaspoon pure vanilla extract 


1. Fill a medium saucepan one-quarter full with 
water. Set the saucepan over medium heat, and 
bring the water to a simmer. 
2. Combine the egg whites, sugar, and cream of tartar 
in the heatproof bowl of an electric mixer; place 
over the saucepan. Whisk constantly until the sugar 
is dissolved and the whites are warm to the touch, 
3 to 31/2 minutes. Test by rubbing the mixture between 
your fingers to ensure that no sugar remains. 
3. Attach the bowl to the electric mixer fitted with 
the whisk attachment, and beat, starting on low 
speed and gradually increasing to high, until stiff, 
glossy peaks form, about 10 minutes. Add the 
vanilla, and mix until combined. Use the meringue 
according to the instructions in the recipes. 
BASICS 657 








creme anglaise 

MAKES ABOUT 2 CUPS 

You can make this sauce up to 2 days ahead; 
press plastic wrap directly onto the surface to 
prevent a skin from forming, and refrigerate. 

4 large egg yolks 
1/4 cup sugar 
1 cup milk 


3/4 cup heavy cream 
1/2 vanilla bean, halved lengthwise 
1. Whisk together the yolks and sugar in a medium 
bowl until pale, about 4 minutes. 
2. Pour the milk and cream into a medium 
saucepan. Scrape in the vanilla seeds; add the bean. 
Heat over medium heat until just about to simmer. 
Reduce heat to low; whisk 1/3 cup into the egg yolk 
mixture. Return to the pan. Cook over medium heat, 
stirring, until thick enough to coat the back of a 
wooden spoon, about 8 minutes. 
3. Pour the mixture through a fine sieve into a stainless-
steel bowl set in a large ice-water bath. Discard 
the solids. Chill until cold, stirring occasionally. 






seven-minute frosting 

MAKES ENOUGH FOR ONE 9-INCH 4-LAYER 
CAKE OR 12 JUMBO CUPCAKES 


13/4 cups sugar 
2 tablespoons light corn syrup 
1/4 cup water 
6 large egg whites 

1. In a small, heavy saucepan, combine 11/2 cups 
sugar, the corn syrup, and water. Heat over medium, 
stirring occasionally, until the sugar has dissolved. 
(Rub a bit between your fingers to make sure there 
is no graininess.) 
2. Raise heat to bring to a boil. Do not stir anymore. 
Boil, washing down the sides of the pan with a pastry 
brush dipped in cold water to prevent the sugar 
from crystallizing, until a candy thermometer registers 
230 degrees F, about 5 minutes. (Depending on the humidity, 
this can take anywhere from 4 to 10 minutes.) 

3. Meanwhile, in the bowl of an electric mixer fitted 
with the whisk attachment, whisk the egg whites 
on medium speed until soft peaks form, about 21/2 
minutes. Gradually add the remaining 1/4 cup sugar. 
Remove the syrup from the heat when the temperature 
reaches 230 degrees F (it will keep rising as the pan 
is removed from the heat). With the mixer on 
medium-low speed, pour the syrup in a steady 
stream down the side of the bowl (to avoid splattering) 
containing the egg white mixture. 
4. Beat the frosting on medium until cool, 5 to 10 
minutes. The frosting should be thick and shiny. 
Use immediately. 






candied lemon, orange, 
or grapefruit peel 

MAKES 11/2 CUPS 

You can use the same technique to make candied 
lemon or orange peel. The technique for candied 
grapefruit peel is slightly different (as detailed 
below) because more pith-the bitter white layer 
between the outer peel and the flesh of citrus 
fruit-must be removed. 

8 oranges, or 10 lemons, or 6 grapefruits 

6 cups sugar, plus more for rolling 

1. Cut the ends off each piece of fruit, and cut the 
fruit in half lengthwise. Insert the tip of a knife carefully 
between fruit and pith about 1/2 inch deep, turn 
the fruit on the other end, and repeat, following the 
shape of fruit and keeping the skin in one piece. 
2. Using your fingers, gently pull the fruit away. Reserve 
the fruit for another use. 
3. Place the citrus peel in a 6-quart pot; fill with 
enough cold water to cover, about 3 quarts. Place 
over medium heat; bring to a boil. Reduce heat; simmer 
20 minutes. Drain the citrus peel; soak in cold 
water until cool enough to handle, about 5 minutes. 
4. Using a melon baller, scrape the soft white pith 
from the peel, being careful not to tear or cut into 
the skin. If you're making candied grapefruit, after 
658 THE MARTHA STEWART LIVING COOKBOOK 


scraping the pith from the peel, simmer the peel for 
20 minutes more, and repeat the technique to remove 
the remaining pith. 

5. Slice each piece of peel into thin strips lengthwise, 
about 1/4 inch wide if garnishing a cake or 1/2 
inch wide if rolling in sugar. 
6. Place 6 cups sugar in a saucepan with 3 cups 
water; stir to combine. Place the pan over medium 
heat, stirring occasionally, until all the sugar has 
dissolved and the syrup comes to a boil, about 8 
minutes. Add the citrus strips to the boiling syrup; 
reduce heat to medium-low. Using a pastry brush 
dipped in cold water, wash down any sugar crystals 
that form on the sides of the pan. Simmer the strips 
until they become translucent and the sugar syrup 
thickens, about 40 minutes. Allow the strips to cool 
in the syrup for 3 hours or overnight. When they 
have cooled, proceed to step 7, or store the strips in 
the syrup in an airtight container, refrigerated, for 
up to 3 weeks. 
7. When cool, remove the strips with a slotted 
spoon. Using your fingers, wipe off the excess syrup; 
roll the strips in sugar. Dry on wire racks. 
NOTE There are two variations of this method. In the 
first, use a vegetable peeler to remove only the outer 
skin from the fruit, and skip the first 5 steps. Slice the 
peels to the desired width, simmer in sugar syrup as 
in step 6, then follow the remaining step. This technique 
produces thin, translucent peels that make 
great garnishes for ice cream and cakes. The second 
variation results in wider, more opaque peels: After 
the outer skin has been removed from the fruit, slice 
the skin into strips of the desired thickness. Place the 
strips in the pan of boiling water for 1 minute, drain, 
and place in sugar syrup as in step 6; follow the remaining 
step. 







crisp topping 

MAKES 2 QUARTS 

Keep this topping in the freezer, in a resealable 
plastic bag, for up to 2 months; it can be used to 
make fruit crisps whenever you need a quick 
dessert. This recipe makes enough for 2 large 
crisps. 

1/2 cup whole almonds 

21/4 cups all-purpose flour 

3/4 cup packed light-brown sugar 
1/3 cup granulated sugar 

1/2 teaspoon ground cinnamon 

1/2 teaspoon coarse salt 

1 cup (2 sticks) chilled unsalted butter, 
cut into small pieces 


1. Preheat the oven to 350 degrees F. Place the nuts in a single 
layer in a rimmed baking sheet; toast until aromatic, 
about 8 minutes. Shake the pan halfway 
through to ensure the nuts toast evenly. Remove 
from the oven; let cool. 
2. Place the toasted almonds in a food processor; 
process until coarsely ground. Transfer to the bowl 
of an electric mixer fitted with the paddle attachment. 
Add the flour, brown sugar, granulated sugar, 
cinnamon, and salt, and mix until just combined. 
Add the butter; mix on low speed until pea-size 
clumps form, 4 to 5 minutes. 






hot fudge sauce 

MAKES ABOUT 2 CUPS 

1 cup heavy cream 

1/3 cup light corn syrup, plus more to 
adjust consistency 


12 ounces bittersweet chocolate, 
finely chopped 


Combine the heavy cream and corn syrup in a 
saucepan. Stir to combine, and bring to a boil over 
medium-high heat. Remove from heat, and add the 
chocolate. If necessary, adjust the consistency with 
additional corn syrup. Whisk until the chocolate 
is melted, and serve. 

BASICS 659 








simple syrup 

MAKES ABOUT 2 QUARTS 

You can make any amount of simple syrup as 
long as you use equal parts sugar and water. If 
using additional flavorings, such as fresh basil, 
mint, or tarragon sprigs, or sliced ginger root, 
pounded lemongrass stalks, or citrus peel, add 
them to the prepared syrup, and let them steep 
while the syrup cools. Discard solid ingredients 
before using or storing the syrup. 

6 cups sugar 

6 cups water 

Prepare an ice-water bath. In a large saucepan, combine 
the sugar and water; bring to a boil over 
medium-high heat. Cook, stirring occasionally, until 
the sugar has completely dissolved, about 10 minutes. 
Transfer to a large bowl set over the ice bath. 
Let stand, stirring occasionally, until the syrup is 
well chilled. Use immediately, or transfer to an airtight 
container, and refrigerate up to 2 months.